                                                                                 HUTP–93/A025, RIMS–946, SISSA–142/93/EP




                                                Kodaira–Spencer Theory of Gravity
                                                                and




arXiv:hep-th/9309140v1 27 Sep 1993
                                            Exact Results for Quantum String Amplitudes


                                                          M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti,1 H. Ooguri2 and C. Vafa


                                                           Lyman Laboratory of Physics, Harvard University
                                                                       Cambridge, MA 02138, USA


                                            We develop techniques to compute higher loop string amplitudes for twisted N = 2
                                     theories with ĉ = 3 (i.e. the critical case). An important ingredient is the discovery of an
                                     anomaly at every genus in decoupling of BRST trivial states, captured to all orders by a
                                     master anomaly equation. In a particular realization of the N = 2 theories, the resulting
                                     string field theory is equivalent to a topological theory in six dimensions, the Kodaira–
                                     Spencer theory, which may be viewed as the closed string analog of the Chern–Simon
                                     theory. Using the mirror map this leads to computation of the ‘number’ of holomorphic
                                     curves of higher genus curves in Calabi–Yau manifolds. It is shown that topological ampli-
                                     tudes can also be reinterpreted as computing corrections to superpotential terms appearing
                                     in the effective 4d theory resulting from compactification of standard 10d superstrings on
                                     the corresponding N = 2 theory. Relations with c = 1 strings are also pointed out.
                                     9/93

                                        1
                                            On leave from SISSA–ISAS and INFN sez. di Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
                                     Present Address: Direzione Regionale per le Autonomie Locali, via A. Caccia 17, 33100 Udine,
                                     Italy.
                                        2
                                            Permanent Address: RIMS, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-01, Japan.
                                  Table of Contents

1. Introduction
2. Review of twisted N = 2 theories
   2.1 Vacuum geometry and twisting of N = 2 theories
   2.2 Examples
   2.3 Special geometry and Calabi–Yau 3–folds
   2.4 Coupling twisted N = 2 theory to gravity
   2.5 Properties of n–point functions and the holomorphicity paradox
   2.6 Canonical coordinates and special coordinates
3. Holomorphic anomaly
   3.1 Holomorphic anomalies of partition functions
   3.2 Holomorphic anomalies of correlation functions
4. Comments on the open string version
   4.1 tt∗ in the open string case
   4.2 Holomorphic anomaly at one–loop
   4.3 Holomorphic anomaly at higher loops
5. What are the topological amplitudes computing?
   5.1 Kodaira–Spencer theory as a string field theory of B–model
   5.2 Deformations of complex structure
   5.3 Kodaira–Spencer theory as the string field theory
   5.4 BV formalism and closed string field theory
   5.5 Open string field theory
   5.6 Kodaira–Spencer theory at one–loop
   5.7 Holomorphic Ray–Singer torsion
   5.8 KS theory at one–loop and RS torsion
   5.9 One–loop topological open string amplitudes
  5.10 Geometrical information encoded in Fg for the A–model
  5.11 Contribution to Fg from an isolated genus g curve
  5.12 Contribution to Fg from a continuous family of curves
  5.13 Contribution to Fg from constant maps




                                           1
6. Solutions to the anomaly equation and the Feynman rules for Fg
    6.1 Feynman rules at g = 2, 3
    6.2 Feynman rules for arbitrary g
    6.3 Construction of propagators
7. Examples — the experimental evidence
    7.1 Orbifold
    7.2 Quintic
    7.3 Other models
8. Physical implications of topological amplitudes
    8.1 Type II superstring interpretation
    8.2 Open superstring interpretation
    8.2 Threshold corrections for heterotic strings
9. Open Problems
10. Appendix A. The bubbled torus
11. Appendix B. Further analysis on the master anomaly equation




                                             2
1. Introduction

    Despite the fact that string theory has been investigated very intensively in particular
in the past decade, many of its fundamental principles and symmetries remain as elusive
as ever. This lack of understanding of the fundamental principles renders questions of
selection of vacua and non–perturbative aspects of string theory out of reach. Actually
the problem runs deeper: Not only the problem has to do with understanding the under-
pinnings of string theory, but also not even many perturbative computations are practical,
even though in principle many should be computable.
    There are some exceptions to the above: First of all, thanks to the matrix models
and topological theories, for non-critical strings with dimension d ≤ 2 one can compute
the partition function of the string theory to all order in perturbation theory summarized
as solutions to interesting equations belonging to integrable hierarchies. Nevertheless such
computations are usually viewed as toy models, not necessarily of relevance to more realistic
critical string theories. One of the more useful results coming from these theories was the
realization that there is an alternative topological string reformulation of bosonic strings.
The word topological signifies the fact that in these theories, before coupling to gravity, the
correlation functions are independent of the worldsheet metric. Actually the topological
framework is more general than the conventional view of bosonic strings as there are
some topological string theories which do not correspond to bosonic strings formulated as
matter coupled to gravity. To see this, one has to note that the most interesting subclass
of topological theories can be obtained by twisting an N = 2 superconformal theory, and
in such case, the string BRST operator will correspond to the supercharge Q = G+ and
the b operator will correspond to the supercharge G− . That this is more general than the
usual bosonic string set up is easy to see from the fact that for the standard formulation of
bosonic string the b-cohomology is trivial but for the N = 2 theory the G− cohomology is
generally non-trivial. The question naturally arises as to whether the non-triviality of the
b–cohomology introduces new phenomena for bosonic strings. We will see in this paper
that the non-triviality of the b–cohomology has dramatic consequences in string theory.
The b–cohomology elements can be used to form Q–trivial perturbations of the theory,
that nevertheless do not decouple. In other words, we shall find an anomaly in decoupling
of BRST trivial states from the physical amplitudes.
    Anomalies of various kinds have played a key role in the development of quantum field
theories and string theory. The existence of anomalies means that a computation that on

                                              3
formal grounds would be expected to be zero turns out to be non–zero due to subtleties
of the quantum field theory (QFT) in question. For example, the famous U (1) chiral
anomaly, explains why the mass of the meson singlet in massless QCD is non-vanishing,
and the existence of conformal anomalies in 2d QFT’s leads to the fact that the critical
dimension of string theory is 26 (or 10) rather than 0. The anomalies are in one way or
another related to topological aspects of the theory in question and have been one of the
most fruitful areas of interaction between physics and mathematics. All these anomalies
can be related to index computations in mathematics which can in turn be effectively
understood in the physical set up in terms of 1d supersymmetric sigma–models. The
topological strings obtained from twisting supersymmetric sigma–model may be viewed as
a more fancy 2d version of these index theorems which combine the geometry of moduli
of Riemann surfaces with the geometry of target space. Viewed in this way, it is perhaps
ironic that the very object usually employed to compute anomalies has itself anomalies!
    Topological string theories that are obtained from twisting an N = 2 superconformal
theory have a central charge ĉ which can be viewed as the complex dimension of these
theories. It turns out that topological string partition functions vanish for all genus (except
g = 1) unless the critical dimension ĉ = 3 is achieved. As far as topological theories
obtained from twisting unitary N = 2 theories are concerned there are very few other cases
of interest. In particular for unitary twisted theories with ĉ > 3 (with integral charges)
not only the partition function, but all the correlation functions vanish as well. For ĉ < 3
one must make special choices of operator insertions to have non-vanishing amplitudes. It
is thus clear that the most interesting case is the case of ĉ = 3.
    There are two other reasons to be interested in this particular value of ĉ. One reason is
that perhaps the most interesting case of non-critical bosonic string corresponds to strings
propagating in 2 dimensions, which is the lower critical dimension of bosonic strings, and
this turns out to be related to a topological theory with ĉ = 3. The other reason to
be interested in this particular value of ĉ is that in constructing more or less realistic
superstring models compactifying from 10 dimensions down to 4, one has to introduce
a 6 dimensional internal theory with ĉ = 3 such as is the case for a Calabi–Yau 3-fold.
It is thus exciting that the critical topological theory may be related to more or less
realistic string compactifications and indeed we will see that the topological amplitudes of
ĉ = 3 topological string theories effectively compute superpotential terms in the effective low
energy field theory of 4–dimensional theories obtained by compactifying superstring on the

                                               4
corresponding internal theory. This is an exciting link which thus makes the computation
of topological amplitudes more than just an academic exercise.
    As if these are not enough reasons to consider critical topological string theories there
are many more: In a particular realization of the critical topological strings, the classical
limit of the string field theory turns out to describe the classical deformation of the complex
structure of Calabi–Yau manifolds (and the related variation of Hodge structure), i.e. the
Kodaira–Spencer theory. This relation can be summarized by writing an action whose
classical solution correspond to all possible deformation of the complex structure of the
Calabi–Yau manifold. This field theory we call the Kodaira–Spencer (KS) theory of gravity.
It is a gravitational theory in 6 real dimensions with vacua being Calabi–Yau 3–folds and
which gauges the complex structure of the manifold. The Kodaira–Spencer theory can be
viewed as the closed string field theory for the critical topological string on a Calabi–Yau.
This is thus a rather simple realization of a closed string field theory which may be helpful
for further understanding of closed string field theory in more general cases. One can also
consider the quantum Kodaira–Spencer theory, i.e. the higher loops on it which are the
same as the partition function at higher genus of topological strings. In particular at one–
loop the partition function can be related to an appropriate combination of determinants
of various operators which turns out to be related to the Ray–Singer holomorphic torsion.
In this context the anomaly in decoupling of BRST–trivial states at one–loop becomes
identical to the Quillen anomaly. Thus the higher genus anomaly that we have found in
the string set up may be viewed as generalization of the holomorphic Quillen anomaly for
the Kodaira–Spencer theory to higher loops. As far as we know no analog of Quillen type
anomaly was previously known for higher loops, and our derivation of the anomaly relies
heavily on string theory techniques.
    The partition function of the critical topological strings in another realization, which
is the mirror transformed version of the KS theory, at the classical level ‘counts’ the
number of holomorphic maps from sphere to the Calabi–Yau manifold. The counting of
holomorphic maps from Riemann surfaces of genus g gets ‘mirror mapped’ to the g–th
loop computation in the quantum Kodaira-Spencer theory.
    The open string version of the critical topological string theories are also rather in-
teresting. In particular, in one version of these theories (the ‘A’ version) the string field
theory one obtains is the ordinary Chern-Simon theory in 3 real dimensions. By mir-
ror map these should be related (in certain cases) to computation of open strings on
3–complex–dimensional Calabi–Yau manifolds.

                                              5
    In this paper we develop techniques for computations of correlation functions of
twisted N = 2 theories coupled to gravity with ĉ = 3. The fact that one can actually
compute the integral of certain realistic string amplitudes over the moduli space and write
the answer in a closed form is a pleasant surprise. In particular in more or less realistic
string theories there are no known computations beyond tree and one–loop level that can
be done in the string theory. For example the bosonic string theories do not make sense
beyond tree level (the amplitudes diverge due to tachyons). Superstring theories have van-
ishing partition function (due to supersymmetry) to all orders in perturbation theory, and
there is a general method to formulate the computations of scattering amplitudes (modulo
subtleties with the question of integration over supermoduli space). But no method to ex-
plicitly carry them out exists in these theories. In fact there is no reason why they should
be simple at all given the presumption that essentially all infinitely many stringy modes
should be relevant for such computations, and thus probably it is too much to expect an
exact solution.
    The idea which leads to the computation of these amplitudes is as follows: Formally the
partition function at genus g of these theories would depend holomorphically on parameters
ti which characterize moduli of the theory. However we will find that, even though the
conjugate fields, which are in the b-cohomology, are Q trivial, they do not decouple, and
so we end up with ∂ i Fg 6= 0. The fact that the integrand of this dependence is a total
derivative on moduli space allows us to go to the boundary to pick up the contributions
which will thus involve lower genus computations. In this way we get a recursive equation
                        i
which we solve for the t dependence of Fg . The holomorphic dependence cannot be fixed
from the anomaly equation alone, however from the fact that they are modular forms of
appropriate weight, and making heavy use of the properties of Fg at the boundary of the
moduli space (making use of the KS theory) they can be determined up to a few constants.
In explicit examples, in particular the quintic 3–fold, for low genus we fix these constants
using the mirror map by using the interpretation of leading terms as counting holomorphic
maps.
    The organization of this paper is as follows: In section 2 we review aspects of N = 2
theories and their twisting. This is a basic section for review of old material but some of it
from a new light. This includes a review of the geometry of vacua captured by tt∗ equations
(which in a special case corresponds to special geometry). We also discuss examples of
N = 2 theories obtained from sigma–models on Calabi–Yau manifolds. These theories
admit two different ways to twist, depending on whether the physical fields correspond to

                                              6
deformation of Kähler classes (A–model) or complex structure (B–model). We also discuss
coupling of these theories to gravity, i.e. how to get string theories from them, and the
notion of the critical dimension. We also point out why the topological partition functions
are sections of line bundles and why inserting physical fields corresponds to taking covariant
derivatives. Also we show how one can choose topological coordinates for moduli (as well as
a trivialization for the line bundle) so that as far as topological observables are concerned
we can replace covariant derivatives with ordinary ones. This turns out to explain the
ansatz used in construction of mirror map.
    In section 3 we derive the basic anomaly equation. This includes the anomaly both
for partition function as well as correlation functions. It is shown how this equation can
be rewritten as a master equation for the full partition function (i.e. summed over all g) of
the theory. We will see that the integrability of the master equation is true but non–trivial
and is a consequence of tt∗ equations.
    In section 4 some aspects of open string theory are discussed. This includes discussion
of tt∗ equation in this context, as well as derivation of anomaly equation at one–loop and
aspects of the anomaly equation at higher loop.
    In section 5 we discuss what topological strings compute for the A– and B–models.
In particular for the B–model we derive the Kodaira–Spencer theory as the string field
theory for topological strings. This includes discussion of the symmetries of KS theory
as well as the background (in)dependence of it with respect to a choice of base point
for complex structure of the manifold. We use the Batalin-Vilkovisky (BV) formalism to
quantize the KS theory. We also discuss the one–loop computations of the KS theory and
show how the computation is equivalent to computation of a particular combination of the
Ray–Singer torsion for the Calabi–Yau manifold. Also discussed there is the behaviour
of the partition function of the KS theory near the boundary of moduli space of complex
structures — a result which will imply that there are only a finite number of coefficients
needed to determine the purely holomorphic dependence of Fg on moduli parameters. In
the context of A–model we show that the topological partition function in a particular
limit (t → ∞) computes the number of holomorphic maps (or more generally the Euler
class of a particular bundle on the moduli space of holomorphic maps). A particularly
important case discussed there is the contribution of constant maps to the topological
string amplitude.
    In section 6 we discuss how to solve the recursive anomaly equation by introducing an
auxiliary space consisting of the massless modes of the conformal theory. We show that

                                              7
certain Feynman graph rules involving fields corresponding to this auxiliary space can be
used to solve the anomaly equation recursively. The vertices of this theory involve n–point
functions of lower genus topological theory, and the propagator involves a covariantly
defined prepotential and its first two derivatives. These rules can be summarized as a
path–integral (which in our case is just a finite dimensional integral) over the auxiliary
space. The emergence of this way to solve the anomaly equation is somewhat mysterious,
but we try to understand it in the context of the Kodaira–Spencer theory.
    Section 7 is the experimental verification of the paper. In that section we give examples
of computation of topological amplitudes, including orbifolds and the quintic 3–fold. In
particular for the quintic we compute the genus 2 partition function explicitly and use
the mirror map to translate it to the ‘counting’ of holomorphic maps from genus 2 to the
quintic.
    Section 8 is where topological strings meet realistic string models. We show how the
partition function of topological strings can be reinterpreted as particular computations
in conventional type II and open superstrings compactified on the corresponding internal
theory. In particular we show that the closed and open string versions of the topological
theory compute the dependence of the coefficients of particular terms in the superpotential
on the moduli of the internal theory. In the context of open strings in particular this
term will have a bearing on the question of gaugino condensates and is worth further
investigation for its phenomenological implications for supersymmetry breaking. Also in
this section we show that the one–loop computation of threshold corrections for heterotic
strings in the context of (2, 2) compactifications can be directly related to the one–loop
amplitude of topological strings. Using properties established for this amplitude we show
that quite independently of which Calabi–Yau manifold one chooses the effective unification
scale is rather sensitive to the change of volume of the manifold and the dependence is such
as to push the unification scale up as we increase the volume of Calabi–Yau from Planck
scale. The sign is fixed by the fact that c2 > 0 for any Calabi–Yau manifold.
    Finally in section 9 we discuss open problems and prospects for future work.
    In appendix A we discuss computation of contribution of bubblings of sphere to topo-
logical amplitudes. In appendix B we present some preliminary analysis on the master
anomaly equation.
    Perhaps it is useful to summarize the organization of this paper with the following
flow chart.


                                             8
                  1. Introduction




                   2. Review of
                       N=2



                  3. Holomorphic    5. B model
4. Open String                      KS theory
                      anomaly

                                    A - model
                  6. Solutions to
                     anomaly
                     equation



                   7. Examples




                  8. Superstring
                   Implications



                     9. Open
 Appendix B         problems        Appendix A
 Analysis of
                                     Bubbling
master equation


                       9
2. Review of twisted N=2 theories

      In this section we review aspects of twisted N = 2 theories. This section will also
serve to set some of the notation we will later use, as well as motivate some of the issues
which are discussed later in the paper. In subsection 2.1 we discuss the topological nature
of N = 2 theories by reviewing the structure of its vacua and chiral rings. We then
discuss the geometry of vacuum bundle as a function of moduli of N = 2 theories (tt∗
equations). We then consider examples of N = 2 theories in the context of sigma–models.
Next we specialize some of the discussions to the Calabi–Yau 3-folds and review special
geometry. In subsection 2.4 we discuss how to make a string theory out of twisted N = 2
theories, which is known as ‘coupling to topological gravity’. Also discussed there is why
Calabi–Yau 3-folds enjoy a special status among such string models (i.e. why dimension
3 is critical). We will also discuss how the partition function of these theories are not
numbers but rather sections of bundles, and how inserting chiral fields is equivalent to
taking covariant derivatives of the partition function; a fact which will be heavily used
in the rest of the paper. Also discussed there is the fundamentally important notion of
‘canonical coordinates’ which turns out to explain the ansatz used in the construction
of mirror maps. We will then give a formal argument for the decoupling of anti-chiral
fields from correlation functions, but argue why this formal argument cannot be correct by
showing its inconsistency with special geometry, which leads us to the notion of anomalies
discussed in section 3.

2.1. Vacuum geometry and twisting of N = 2 theories

      N = 2 supersymmetric theories in 2 dimensions have a very rich structure. We will
restrict our attention below to superconformal ones even though most of what we say can
be easily generalized to massive N = 2 theories (we will use the notations and the results
of [1], [2] which the reader may consult for more detail).
      Superconformal N = 2 theories have four supercharges: Two conjugate left–movers
  ±                                       ±
(G ) and two conjugate right–movers (G ), and two U (1) currents, one left–moving (J)
and one right–moving (J). The ± sign over G’s signify their U (1) charge with respect
to the corresponding current. Among the important commutation relations of the N = 2
algebra is the zero-mode commutators, which we denote by the same label as the fields:

                                        (G± )2 = 0

                                              10
                                           {G+ , G− } = 2HL

                                             [G± , HL ] = 0

where HL denotes the left–moving hamiltonian, and similarly for the right–movers. Also
all left–moving operators (anti-)commute with the right–moving ones. From the nilpotency
of the G’s it follows that we can define the notion of G cohomologies both for the fields and
for the states. If we wish to get a finite dimensional space for cohomology group we need
to consider suitable addition of left– and right–moving G′ s. There are two inequivalent
choices, up to conjugation, and they are given by

                                                                +
                                            Q1 = G+ + G

                                                                −
                                            Q2 = G+ + G

As far as the cohomology states are concerned Q1 and Q2 and their conjugates all give
rise to the same space, spanned by the supersymmetric ground states of the theory (HL =
HR = 0). However as far as the cohomology of the fields are concerned, i.e., fields which
satisfy
                                    [Q, φ] = 0       φ ∼ φ + [Q, Λ]

even though they can be set into 1-1 correspondence with ground states of the theory,
they are not equivalent with each other as operators. The cohomology operators for Q1
are called (c, c), i.e., (chiral, chiral) fields and those of Q2 are called (c, a), i.e., (chiral,
anti-chiral) fields (where the two entries correspond to the cohomology condition for left–
and right–moving charges respectively). Those of Q†1 and Q†2 are the conjugate fields and
are called (a, a) and (a, c) fields respectively. Since the discussion for the two choices of
Q’s is essentially identical, as they differ only by a convention dependent choice of sign
(J → −J), we will restrict ourselves to Q1 and its conjugate. We will also drop the
subscript from Q1 and denote it simply by Q. Also, to simplify terminology we will call
the (c, c) fields simply as chiral fields and the (a, a) fields as the anti-chiral fields.
     Let us choose a basis for chiral fields representing the Q–cohomology by φi , and denote
the conjugate anti-chiral fields by φi . The N = 2 algebra implies that the (left,right)
dimension of φi , (hi , hi ) is half its charge (qi , qi )

                                                         1
                                          (hi , hi ) =     (qi , qi )
                                                         2
                                                    11
and that the range for the qi are bounded by the central charge ĉ of the N = 2 algebra:

                                          0 ≤ qi , q i ≤ ĉ

The dimensions of the anti-chiral fields φi are the same as φi but their U (1) charge is
minus that of φi .
    The chiral fields form a ring, the chiral ring, defined by
                                              k
                                     φi φj = Cij φk + [Q, · ]

Using the N = 2 algebra it is easy to see that this definition of the ring is independent of
                                                                                 k
the points of insertion of the fields on the worldsheet. Sometimes we will view Cij as a
matrix Ci with component (Ci )kj . The corresponding ring for anti-chiral fields differs only
                           k      k ∗
by complex conjugation of Cij = (Cij ) .
    As is well known, viewing chiral fields as the first component of a superfield, we can
modify the action by perturbing with them:
                Z                  Z                  Z              Z
                                 i    2   2 −            2   (2)   i          (2)
            t i    2   2 +
                  d z d θ φi + t     d z d θ φi = t i
                                                        d z φi + t     d2 z φ i

        (2)             −
where φi      = {G− , [G , φi ]} and ti are complex parameters. If we wish to have a unitary
                   i
theory we need t = (ti )∗ (later in the paper we will relax this condition). It is known [3]
that the only criterion needed for preserving the conformal invariance is that (hi , hi ) =
(1/2, 1/2), i.e. that the charge of φi be (1, 1).
    As mentioned before there is a 1-1 correspondence between the chiral fields and the
supersymmetric ground states of the theory, which follows by general considerations of
QFT relating operators to states. However it is more useful to do this rather explicitly,
which along the way leads to the notion of defining a topological theory. If we consider a
hemisphere (see Fig. 1) with the field φi inserted on it then one is tempted to identify the
state obtained at the boundary of this region by the path integral, as the cohomologically
non-trivial state representing the supersymmetric ground state corresponding to φi .



                             i〉 =                                    φi

           Fig. 1: Inserting the chiral field φi on the hemisphere and doing the
           twisted path integral on it will result in a state |ii at the boundary. This
           state is BRST equivalent to a ground state and can be made an exact
           ground state by pulling the neck infinitely long.

                                                12
    However this is not correct: One reason for this is that the state we get at the boundary
is in the wrong Hilbert space, i.e. the NS sector. For the supersymmetric vacuum we need
to be in the Ramond sector. Another difficulty is that we need to argue that the state we get
is annihilated by Q and to do this we have to make sure that Q is a scalar charge (especially
when we have more non-trivial Riemann surfaces). To solve both these problems one twists
the supersymmetric theory to obtain a topological theory, by introducing a background
gauge field A which couples to the U (1) current [4]
                                              Z
                                   S→S+             J Ā + ¯
                                                          JA


and one sets A = ω/2, Ā = ω/2 where ω is the spin connection. Introducing this gauge
field has the effect of shifting the spin of charged fields by half their charge. Thus Q
                                                                  −
becomes a scalar charge. At the same time G− (z) and G (z) become spin (2,0) and (0,2)
currents respectively. Introducing this twisting, on the hemisphere of Fig.1, has the effect
of converting the state obtained at the boundary to a state in the Ramond sector, which is
annihilated by Q (where we use the fact that φi commutes with Q). Also the dimensions
of all the fields will shift by h → h − q2 , thus φi become dimension zero and φi become
dimension (1, 1) for marginal directions. We could obtain the exact ground state, not just
a state cohomologically equivalent to a ground state, simply by doing the path integral on
the hemisphere with the neck pulled infinitely long. We denote the corresponding ground
state by |ii. There is a canonical vacuum which is obtained by not inserting any field at
all. This we will denote by |0i. Note that we can write

                                     |ii = φi |0i + Q| · i

by using the fact that moving φi to the boundary is a Q–trivial operation. Also note that

                                  φi |ji = (Ci )kj |ki + Q| · i

We can consider also the conjugate twist (the anti-topological theory) in which Q† becomes
a scalar. In this case we can parametrize the same vacua using the anti-chiral fields, which
we denote by |ii. We must thus have a change of basis transformation relating the two:

                                         hi| = hj|Mij

                                               13
which by CPT satisfies M M ∗ = 1. Note that we have thus two natural inner products,
the topological one η and the hermitian one g defined respectively by

                                               ηij = hj|ii

                                               gij = hj|ii

which satisfy
                                             gik = ηij M j
                                                           k

Also note that in the topological theory

                                                             l           l
                hφi φj φk i = h0|φi φj φk |0i = hi|φj |ki = Cjk hi|li = Cjk ηil = Cjki

which implies that Cijk is totally symmetric in indices (for indices of even fermion number).
      We are interested in seeing how the structure of vacua and chiral fields deform as we
perturb the theory by marginal chiral fields. As discussed the parameter space is locally
                i
given by (ti , t ). We would like to study the geometry of the vacuum bundle, i.e. how
the collection of vacuum states {|i(t, t)i} varies as a function of the parameters and in
                                                                    i
particular find the dependence of Cijk ,g and η on (ti , t ). These are studied in [2] with
the following results: First, using the fact that insertion of anti-chiral fields in the action
modifies the theory by Q-trivial terms, it follows that

                                              ∂ l Cijk = 0                               (2.1)

i.e., Cijk is a symmetric holomorphic function of moduli. One introduces a connection on
the vacuum bundle so that Di |ji ≡ (∂/∂ti − Ai )|ji and Di |ji are orthogonal to all the
vacua. Then the following equations, the tt∗ equations, hold

                          [Di , Dj ] = [Di , Dj ] = [Di , C j ] = [Di , Cj ] = 0

                             [Di , Cj ] = [Dj , Ci ] [Di , C j ] = [Dj , C i ]

                                        [Di , Dj ] = −[Ci , C j ]                        (2.2)

One can also arrange, by a judicious choice of coordinates, for η to be constant [5]. It is
also possible to choose the holomorphic (or topological) gauge 3 , in which Ai = 0 and in
which
                                            Ai = −g∂i g −1 .                             (2.3)
  3
      This choice of gauge is implicit in eq.(2.1).

                                                    14
In this gauge, which is the natural gauge chosen by the twisted path–integral, the chiral
vacuum states |i(t)i depend holomorphically on the moduli. In this gauge the third line
of eq.(2.2) can be written as

                                ∂ j (g∂i g −1 ) = [Ci , g(Cj )† g −1 ].                 (2.4)

      We would like to digress slightly to discuss some ambiguities in the twisted path–
integral. Ambiguities arise in the normalization of path–integral when there are zero
modes to be absorbed. When we twist a topological theory by coupling the U (1) current
to a background gauge field, the axial U (1) current (J + J) becomes anomalous, and so
there are fermion zero modes to absorb. In fact to be precise, using the fact that the OPE
of J’s have a central term
                                                          ĉ
                                         J(z)J(0) ∼          ,
                                                         z2
in genus g the twisting will give rise to a charge violation of

                                   ∆(q, q) = ĉ(g − 1, g − 1).                          (2.5)

This ambiguity in how to absorb the zero mode translates to the ambiguity in defining the
normalization of the chiral states |ii. Since they are all related by applying the operators
φi on |0i it suffices to discuss ambiguities for |0i. We can choose the absorption of fermion
zero modes to be consistent with the holomorphic dependence of |0i on moduli. But we
cannot completely fix the ambiguity. Consider the line bundle L over the moduli space,
generated by the vacuum state |0i. Then what we are saying is that a holomorphic choice of
normalization of the twisted path–integral is equivalent to a choice of holomorphic section
of L. Two different normalizations of the path-integral give differently normalized vacua
as:
                                          |0i → f (ti )|0i

Note that this freedom in redefining the normalization of |0i holomorphically translates to
a change in the connection A0i0 → A0i0 + ∂i f . Since we have chosen a holomorphic gauge

                                             ∂i h0|0i
                                    A0i0 =            = −∂i K,
                                              h0|0i

where
                                       exp(−K) = h0|0i.

                                                 15
The fact that |0i is a section of L translates to the statement that the genus zero partition
function Z0 (with operators inserted to avoid vanishing by charge conservation) will be
a section of L2 (in addition to having properties induced from insertion of operators).
Similarly by sewing axioms of topological theory it follows that Zg is a section of L2−2g .
Needless to say, all physically interesting quantities should be independent of how we
choose to fix this normalization ambiguity.

2.2. Examples

     Even though our discussions in the paper will be for the general case we will occa-
sionally specialize the results to some interesting classes of N = 2 SCFT. The one which
we will use most in this paper are the supersymmetric sigma–models. It is known that the
sigma–model on a Kähler manifold M give rise to an N = 2 QFT [6]. The action is given
by                   Z       h           j             j
                                                         i
                                             ∗
                S=       d2 z ωij ∂X i ∂X + ωij ∂X i ∂X + Fermionic terms.

where ωij denotes a complexified Kähler class.           If we denote an integral basis for
H (1,1) (M, Z) by ωi , we have
                                             ω = ti ωi

and thus ti parametrize the moduli of this theory. The fermionic terms in the action are
there to make the above supersymmetric. Apart from the kinetic term, the fermionic terms
include the four fermion interaction term
                                     Z
                                        Rij kl χi χj ψk ψ l

which will prove crucial for us later on.
     One can twist the fermion number, as discussed in the previous section, to obtain a
topological theory [4]. The effect on the action is only to modify the spin of the fermions,
making the χ’s scalar, the ψi is a (1,0) form and ψ j is a (0,1) form. To obtain the
                                                                                     i
observables of this theory it is convenient to go to the large volume limit first ti , t → ∞.
In this limit the Hilbert space of the theory can be represented by differential forms on
M where the (left, right) U (1) charge of the state can be identified with (holomorphic,
anti-holomorphic) degree of the form. Moreover on this Hilbert space we get the following
dictionary
                                             G+ ↔ ∂

                                                16
                                                       +
                                                   G ↔∂
                     +
and so Q1 = G+ + G = d and thus the observables φi in this theory are in 1-1 correspon-
dence with the cohomology elements of M represented by

                                       (a)
                            φ(a) = Ai ...i j ...j χi1 · · · χir χj1 · · · χjs
                                         1       r 1   s



The chiral ring for t, t → ∞ is the same as the cohomology ring, but for finite t’s it is in
general a deformation of the cohomology ring of M , taking into account the holomorphic
instantons from sphere to M , i.e., rational curves on M . This deformed ring is called the
quantum cohomology ring of M . The precise form of how the instantons contribute to this
ring will very much depend on the first Chern class of M . The most interesting case is
when c1 (M ) = 0, i.e., the Calabi–Yau case. In this case, which is also the case needed to
obtain a conformal theory out of the sigma–model, the instanton of arbitrary large degree
affect the chiral ring. In particular if one is interested in the quantum cohomology ring for
a 3-fold Calabi–Yau, if we let i, j, k to denote three (1,1) classes, then the ring structure
coefficients are given by

                                         X                              q1r1 ...qnrn
                            Cijk (t) =           ri rj rk dr1 ...rn
                                             r
                                                                      1 − q1r1 ...qnrn

where n = dim H (1,1) (M ), qr = exp(−tr ), and dr1 ...rn are the number of primitive holo-
morphic instantons of degree (r1 , ..., rn). The denominator is the contribution of multi-
coverings of primitive instantons [7], [8]. Note that the structure constants of this ring
depend on the choice of the Kähler class, but are independent of the complex structure of
M.
     Now, as discussed in the previous section superconformal theories, have two natural
rings [1], the (c, c) and (a, c) and thus also there exists two ways to twist the theory. In
particular in the case of Calabi–Yau case for which both the fermion number and the axial
fermion number are conserved, we can twist in two different ways, depending on which
of these rings we wish to be the physical ring. The choice discussed above corresponds
to twisting the fermion number current and gives rise to (say) the (c, c) ring as being
the topological one. The other choice of twisting, corresponding to axial fermion number
twisting has also been studied [9], [10]. Again it turns out to be easier to study the model

                                                       17
in the large volume limit. In this limit again the Hilbert space can be identified with
anti-holomorphic forms wedged with holomorphic vectors, i.e.,
                                         M                ∗
                                  H=                ∧p T M ⊗ ∧q TM                      (2.6)
                                          p,q


where in here and in the following TM , T M denote the holomorphic and anti-holomorphic
                                  ∗         ∗
tangent bundles respectively and TM , T M denote the holomorphic and anti-holomorphic
cotangent bundles. We can obtain from this Hilbert space the Hilbert space of forms
simply by contracting the vector indices with holomorphic n-form which always exists for
a Calabi–Yau n-fold. This converts the (q, p) sector above to a differential form of degree
(n − q, p). On this Hilbert space H′ the dictionary for the supercharges turn out to be

                                                     1 † ¯
                                       G+ =            (∂ + ∂)
                                                     2

                                                     1 ¯
                                       Ḡ− =           (∂ − ∂ † )                       (2.7)
                                                     2
                          −
Note that Q2 = G+ + G         ↔ ∂ and so again the observables can be identified with the
cohomology elements of M . For later use in the paper we need also expression for left–
and right–moving fermion numbers. Unlike the previous case, the fact that (2.7) mixes
the holomorphic and anti–holomorphic degrees in this non–trivial way, implies that the
fermion numbers in this case are not simply identified as the left and right degrees of form,
as that would lead to a wrong commutation relation with G+ . To fix this, we should recall
[11] that for Kähler manifolds there is an sl(2) action on the forms, generated by wedging
with the Kähler class k, contracting with k which we represent by k † and the shifted total
degree of the form (p + q − n)/2. Also we have

                               [k, ∂ † ] = i∂          [k † , ∂] = −i∂ †
                                                †             †
                               [k † , ∂] = i∂             [k, ∂ ] = −i∂.

Using this we can write FL,R as

                                          1
                                FL,R =      (ik − ik † ± (p − q))                       (2.8)
                                          2

the reader can check that the right–hand side (r.h.s.) is CPT odd and has the correct
commutation properties with the G’s.

                                                     18
      Even though the chiral fields are again in 1-1 correspondence with the cohomology
elements, the chiral ring for this twisting is very different from the previous one. Let Ω
denote the holomorphic n−form. For example if the Calabi–Yau is a 3–fold, then the
structure constants for the marginal directions, which are parametrized by elements of
H (2,1) (M ) can be written as
                                                Z
                                     Cijk = −           Ω ∧ ∂i ∂j ∂k Ω
                                                    M

Note that these structure constants are independent of the Kähler class so they continue
to hold for finite volume as well. But they do depend on the complex structure of M ,
which is parametrized by elements of H (2,1) (M ) as will be discussed in great detail later
in this paper.
      So to summarize, we see that in the first case of twisting, i.e. the (c, c) twisting,
the topological correlation functions are sensitive to the Kähler class of the manifold and
compute the rational curves in the Calabi–Yau. This twisting is called the A–twisting or the
Kähler twisting. On the other hand, in the case of (a, c) twisting we see that the topological
correlation functions are only sensitive to the complex structure of the manifold which is
encoded in how the holomorphic three form varies (or the variation of Hodge structure).
This twisting is called the B–twisting or the complex twisting.

      NOTE: For convenience of keeping the same notation in the rest of the paper when
                                                                                          +
we deal with the B– or A–model we denote the supercharge always by Q = G+ + G by a
trivial change of conventions on the right–moving U (1) charge if necessary. This will not
cause confusion as we rarely talk about both models at the same time.

2.3. Special geometry and Calabi–Yau 3–folds

      In a unitary superconformal theory there is only one chiral primary with q = 0, namely
the identity operator 1. We consider the normalized metric4

                                                     gij̄
                                          Gij̄ =               ,                              (2.9)
                                                    h0̄|0i β=1

(here and in the following the indices i, j̄ are restricted to the marginal directions in
coupling constant space whereas indices a, b̄ go through all chiral primaries). It is easy to

  4
      Here β is the perimeter of the circle used to define the states |ii (cf. Fig. 1).

                                                    19
see that Gij̄ is equal to the usual Zamolodchikov metric [12] (restricted to the marginal
directions). Indeed the definition of the tt∗ metric can be written as

                                   hb̄|aiβ = hRb̄† (β)Ra (0)isphere ,

where Ra is the operator creating the Ramond vacuum |ai out of the SL(2, C)–invariant
vacuum. Now, the topological map |ai → φa differs only for the overall normalization from
the unitary spectral flow operator U which maps the R sector into the N S one. Since the
unitary operator U preserves inner products, we have
                                                               hb̄|aiβ
                                    hφ̄b̄ (β)φa (0)isphere =           ,                       (2.10)
                                                               h0̄|0iβ
where we used that the correct (unitary) normalization of U is just the one for which
h1isphere = 1. Eq.(2.10) is true for any chiral primary fields. In the particular case in
which φi has charge 1 (and dimensions (1/2, 1/2)) from (2.9) we get
                                                                Gij̄
                                     hφ̄j (z)φi (0)isphere =         .                         (2.11)
                                                                zz̄
Let Φi (z, θ) be the N = 2 chiral superfield whose first component is φi . From5 (2.11) and
N = 2 supersymmetry we get
                                                                    − +       − + 
                                                       Gij̄         θ12 θ12    θ̄12 θ̄12
              hΦi (z1 , θ1 ) Φ̄j (z2 , θ2 )isphere =        ∗    1+         1+     ∗     .
                                                     z̃12 z̃12       z̃12        z̃12
          (2)   R
Then, if φi ≡ d2 θ Φi is the marginal operator multiplying the coupling ti in the action,
one has
                                              (2)        (2)
                                    Gij̄ = hφi (1) φ̄j̄ (0)isphere ,

which is the original definition of the Zamolodchikov metric [12].
      The Zamolodchikov metric Gij̄ has remarkable geometric properties. The most inter-
esting situation is when ĉ = 3. In this case the metric Gij̄ satisfies a set of constraints
which define the so–called special (Kähler) geometry. A hermitian metric Gij̄ is said to be
special Kähler if:
  i) It is a restricted Kähler metric, i.e. a Kähler metric such that the corresponding
      Kähler form is 2π times the Chern class of a line bundle L. Locally this means

                                           Gij̄ = ∂¯j̄ ∂i K,
                                                                                               (2.12)
                                           with k1kL2 = e−K

  5                                  ±
      We use the shorthand notation θ12 = θ1± − θ2± and z̃12 = z1 − z2 − θ1+ θ2− − θ1− θ2+ .

                                                    20
      where 1 is a local holomorphic section trivializing L.
 ii) There is a holomorphic symmetric tensor Cijk with coefficients in L2 satisfying6

                                       ∂¯i Cjkl = 0        Di Cjkl = Dj Cikl ,                              (2.13)

      such that the Riemann curvature of Gij̄ reads

                     Rij̄k l ≡ −∂¯j̄ Γlki = Gkj̄ δi l + Gij̄ δkl − e2K Cikn Gnn̄ Cj̄∗m̄n̄ Gm̄l .            (2.14)

      It follows from the tt∗ equations that the condition i) is satisfied by the Zamolodchikov
metric Gij̄ of any critical N = 2 theory , with the bundle L identified with the vacuum
line bundle defined by the identity operator. Moreover, if ĉ = 3 the condition ii) holds as
well with
                                   Cijk = h0|φi (∞) φj (1) φk (0)|0itop. .                                  (2.15)

ĉ = 3 is crucial here because only in this case Cijk is non-vanishing for marginal fields
(1+1+1=3).
      In view of eq.(2.12), the first assertion is equivalent to saying that Gij̄ is Kähler with
potential
                                               K = − log h0̄|0i.                                            (2.16)

Let us show this. The index 0 will denote the identity operator, while i, j, ... = 1, . . . , m
denote the marginal directions (i.e. chiral primary fields with charge 1). Then U (1) charge
conservation gives
                                                                        0
                                g0k̄ = gk0̄ = 0                gCi† g −1 k = 0.

Let us project the tt∗ equation in the identity sector
                                                 0
            −∂¯j̄ ∂i log h1̄|1i = ∂¯j̄ (g∂i g −1 ) 0 = (Ci )0k gkl̄ Cj̄∗0̄ l̄ g 0̄0 = gij̄ /g00̄ ≡ Gij̄ ,

where we used the definition of the identity operator i.e.

                                              Ci0k = C0ik = δi k .                                          (2.17)

This shows i). To show ii) let us notice that, if ĉ = 3, the tensor defined by eq.(2.15) has
all the required properties: From (2.15) we see that it is a section7 of Sym3 T ⊗ L2 : Indeed
  6
      Here Di is covariant both with respect the Christoffel connection of Gij̄ and the canonical
connection on the bundle L, i.e. Ai = −∂i K.
  7
      Here and below T denotes the (1, 0) tangent bundle of the coupling constant (moduli) space.

                                                        21
φi is an operator valued section of T while |0i and h0| are Hilbert space–valued sections of
L. Cijk is holomorphic because, as we saw in section 2.1, the topological 3–point function
has this property. Finally, it satisfies the first condition in (2.13) as a consequence of
equation (2.1). It also satisfies the second condition in (2.13) because it differs from the
corresponding equation in (2.2) only by the fact that in Di Cj the derivative should also
act on the j index by the Christoffel connection but that is clearly symmetric in its indices.
Here it is crucial that the tt∗ connection is equal to the Zamolodchikov connection plus the
canonical connection for the bundle L as it follows from the equation (compare eqs.(2.9),
(2.16))
                                               gij̄ = e−K Gij̄ ,                              (2.18)

the definition of the tt∗ connection (2.3), and the definitions of the Zamolodchikov and
line bundle connections which are given by Γlki ≡ Gkm̄ ∂i Gm̄l and −∂i K, respectively.
       Now we are ready to show the main identity, eq.(2.14). Using the well–known formula
for the Riemann curvature in Kähler geometry, we have
                                                         
                          −Rij̄k l = ∂¯j̄ Gkm̄ ∂i Gm̄l =
                                                                  
                                   = ∂¯j̄ gim̄ ∂i g m̄l − ∂¯j̄ ∂i K δkl =
                                                                                              (2.19)
                                  = [Ci , C̄j̄ ]kl − Gij̄ δkl =
                                  = e2K Cikn Gnn̄ Cj̄∗m̄n̄ Gm̄l − Gkj̄ δi l − Gij̄ δkl ,

where we used (2.18), (2.17) and the tt∗ equations together with the CPT constraint
η −1 g = (g −1 )t η ∗ .
       Special geometry originally was discovered in two seemingly unrelated contexts: The
geometry of periods on a Calabi–Yau 3–fold [13] and N = 2 supergravity in four dimensions
[14]. The ground state geometry of ĉ = 3 superconformal theories combines these two topics
together in a natural way. In the present paper we shall use quite heavily the relationship
of special geometry with the complex geometry of Calabi–Yau 3–folds. In order to be
self–contained, we recall the basic facts about this connection.
       Before doing this, it is convenient to formulate the above special geometry in a slightly
more abstract way. Since special geometry is equivalent to the tt∗ geometry for a family of
ĉ = 3 superconformal theories, we shall use the terminology arising in this last context8 .
   8
       Without losing any real generality, we can also assume that all the chiral primary fields have
integral U (1) charges. This assumption will be implicit throughout the paper. For a discussion of
‘special geometry’ in presence of fractional charges, see Ref.[15]

                                                       22
      Consider the ‘improved’ connection

                               ∇i = Di − Ci ,           ¯ j̄ = D̄j̄ − C̄j̄ ,
                                                        ∇                                     (2.20)

acting on the vector bundle V of ground states of equal left–right charge. The tt∗ equations
are equivalent to the statement that the ‘improved’ connection is flat. Hence we can identify
all fibers of V with the one at a given base point by parallel transport with respect to this
improved connection. In this way (apart for aspects related to global monodromies) we
can see V as a product bundle with fiber the fixed ground state vector space V . In this
                                         ∇j̄ reduce to the ordinary ones ∂i and ∂¯j̄ . To
gauge, the ‘improved’ derivatives ∇i and ¯
the fibers of V we can give a real structure by declaring real the ground states which are
mapped into themselves by CPT. Since

                                     (Ci )k̄l̄ Ml̄ m = Mk̄k (Ci )kl ,

the real structure is invariant under parallel transport, i.e. the fixed vector space V has
a natural real structure. We fix once and for all a basis of V whose elements |αi (α =
1, . . . , 2m + 2) are real vectors. In this basis CPT acts by the usual complex conjugation.
The tt∗ metric is not invariant under parallel transport by the ∇–connection; however, if
q is the U (1) charge operator, the following real skew–symmetric (symplectic) metric

                                      Qαβ = hα|(−1)q+3/2 |βi

is invariant because the matrix Ci Q is skew–symmetric. In the gauge in which the ‘im-
proved’ connection vanishes, this symplectic form is just a constant matrix; we can choose
our real basis {|αi} so that it is the standard symplectic unit E.
      At a given point in coupling space, the ground state space V admits a decomposition
into subspaces corresponding to states having definite U (1) charges. However, as we change
the couplings ti , this charge decomposition changes, since parallel transport by the ∇–
connection does not preserve charge. This is obvious from (2.20) since the matrix Ci ,
representing multiplication by the field φi , increases the charge by 1. Special geometry
just describes how the states of given charge rotate in the fixed space V as we vary the
couplings.
      At a given point in coupling constant space V decomposes into a one–dimensional
subspace corresponding to |0i having degree9 0, an m–dimensional subspace spanned by
  9
      For later convenience, we define the ‘degree’ l of a ground state to be the U (1) charge of the
corresponding NS state, i.e. l = q + 3/2.

                                                   23
the vectors φi |0i having degree 1, and their dual subspaces (with respect to the symplectic
form Q) having degrees 3 and 2, respectively. As we vary t, the states of degree 0 form a
line subbundle of the trivial vector bundle with fiber the fixed space V . This line subbundle
is just our vacuum bundle L. In the same way, the states of degree 1, {φi |0i}, span the
fibers of the vector bundle (T ⊗ L), those of degree 2 the dual space (T ⊗ L)∗ , and finally
those of degree 3 the dual line bundle L∗ . Thus we have the charge decomposition

                            V = L ⊕ (T ⊗ L) ⊕ (T ⊗ L)∗ ⊕ L∗ .                            (2.21)

This decomposition satisfies four main properties. Let ξ and ζ be two sections of V with
definite degrees; then
 1. ξ t Eζ = 0 unless l(ξ) + l(ζ) = 3.
 2. (−1)l(ξ) ξ † Eξ > 0. Indeed, comparing with the definition of g, we see that this is just
    the squared norm of the vacuum state corresponding to ξ.
 3. ∂i ξ is a sum of two pieces, one with l = l(ξ) and one with l = l(ξ) + 1. This property
    is evident from (2.20) which also gives

                                         ∂i ξ            = −Ci ξ.                        (2.22)
                                                l(ξ)+1


                                                     ¯ j̄ acting on a degree 0 state produces
 4. L is a holomorphic line subbundle of V . Indeed, ∇
    a pure degree 0 state; hence the flat connection ∇ ¯ j̄ induces a holomorphic structure
    on L. Since in the present gauge the ∇–connection is trivial, this is just the canonical
    holomorphic structure for a subbundle of V .
    Working in the symplectic basis, the only non–trivial datum is how the original ground
states |φa i are written in terms of the symplectic ones |αi, i.e. we must know the coefficients
of the expansion
                                         |φa i = V αa |αi.                               (2.23)

From these coefficients we can easily recover the tt∗ metric

                                      gab̄ = (−1)la Vb† EVa ,                            (2.24)

while the matrices Ci can be extracted from (2.22) which can be rewritten as

                         ∂i Vaα = −(Ci )ab Vbα + terms with lower charge.

                                                  24
Giving V αa is equivalent to giving the decomposition in eq.(2.21). The matrix Vaα is re-
stricted by the above four conditions. Conversely, given any decomposition (2.21) satisfying
these conditions we can construct a metric g satisfying the tt∗ equations with respect to
the Ci defined by eq.(2.22) and having all the properties discussed above. Indeed the tt∗
equations are equivalent to the flatness of the connection ∇, which is automatic in such a
construction.
      In fact, it is enough to know V α ≡ V α0 , i.e. how the vacuum line bundle L sits in V .
Indeed from (2.17) one has

                            ∂i V α = −Ci0
                                       k
                                          Vkα + . . . = −Viα mod. V α ,

so we can read Viα (i.e. the degree 1 subbundle) from the derivatives of V α . The degree 2
and 3 subbundles then can be recovered by duality. Acting ∇¯ on both sides of eq.(2.23), we
see that V α should be a holomorphic function of the t’s; this is property 4. above. Then
the above four conditions are automatically satisfied if and only if V α is holomorphic and
satisfies10
                            V t EV = V t E ∂i V = 0,      V t EV > 0.                       (2.25)

So given any holomorphic function V α (t) satisfying (2.25) we construct a special geometry.
In particular, from (2.24) we see that the Kähler potential is

                                      e−K = g00̄ = V t EV.                                  (2.26)

Consider ∂i ∂j ∂k V α . The component of top degree is given11 by −(Ci Cj Ck )ρ0 Vρα . Hence

                            V t E∂i ∂j ∂k V = −(Ci Cj Ck )00 ≡ −Cijk ,                      (2.27)

which is the most convenient way to define Cijk .
      The above discussion applies to any N = 2 conformal model with ĉ = 3. Now
we specialize to the B–model based on a Calabi–Yau 3–fold M (which we assume to be
simply–connected). In this case the chiral primary fields of U (1) charge q are in one–to–one
correspondence with the elements of H 3−q,q (M ). This follows from eq.(2.8) and the fact
that for a simply connected Calabi–Yau 3–fold the relevant vacua correspond to primitive
cohomology classes in degree 3, which are annihilated both by k and k † . All these spaces
 10
      In particular, any special manifold is a Legendre submanifold of a complex contact manifold.
 11
      The index ρ labels the unique chiral primary field of charge 3, normalized so that hρi = 1.

                                                25
are subspaces of the ordinary de Rham group H 3 (M, C); since the de Rham cohomology
depends only on the topology of M , this group is independent of the couplings ti (which
control the complex structure of M ). H 3 (M, C) can be seen as a fixed space while the
definite charge subspaces H 3−q,q (M ) do move as we move the ti ’s. Then the constant space
H 3 (M, C) is easily identified with the space V of the abstract N = 2 theory. Notice that
this space has a natural real structure, namely a class in H 3 (M, C) is real iff it belongs to
H 3 (M, R); this structure coincides with the one defined by CPT in the B–model. Then the
charge decomposition is identified with the Hodge decomposition H 3 (M ) = ⊕q H 3−q,q (M ).
On H 3 (M ) there is a natural symplectic form given by
                                              Z
                                   Q(α, β) = α ∧ β,
                                                 M

which is also independent of ti and real since it is topologically defined. With respect to
this pairing and real structure, the Hodge decomposition satisfies 1. and 2. (the Riemann
bilinear relations). That the Hodge decomposition also satisfies conditions 3. and 4. is
a consequence of the Kodaira–Spencer theory of complex deformations. Let µi be the
element12 of H 1 (M, TM ) associated with an infinitesimal variation δti of the complex
structure, and let ω be any harmonic (3 − q, q) form. Then

                                      ∂i ω = µi ∧ ω + βi ,                               (2.28)

where βi is a closed (3 − q, q) form, and µi acts on forms as contraction for the vector
index and exterior multiplication for the form index. Thus µi ∧ ω is a (2 − q, q + 1) form.
Eq.(2.28) is nothing else than condition 3. The same argument applied to ∂¯j̄ ω implies
condition 4.
      According to our previous discussion, we can recover the ground state geometry for
the B–model provided we know how the space H 3,0 (M ) (which we identified with the line
subbundle L) sits in H 3 (M, C), i.e. if we know for each point in moduli space which de
Rham class corresponds to the (3, 0) form Ω. Choosing Ω to depend holomorphically on
ti , we can rewrite eq.(2.26) and (2.27) in the form
                                         Z
                                  −K
                                 e    =      Ω̄ ∧ Ω
                                          M
                                           Z                                             (2.29)
                                 Cijk = −       Ω ∧ ∂i ∂j ∂k Ω.
                                             M

 12
      TM denotes the holomorphic tangent bundle (sheaf) of the Calabi–Yau manifold M .

                                               26
    As a symplectic basis of vacua we can take the states associated to the (real) 3–forms
which are dual to a canonical set of 3–cycles, i.e. a set of cycles γα (α = 1, . . . , 2m + 2)
such that their intersection pairing has the canonical form

                                  #(γα , γβ ) = δβ,α+m+1 − δβ+m+1,α .

Then our basic vector V α becomes
                                                                  Z
                                                          α
                                                      V       =        Ω,                           (2.30)
                                                                  γα


so that V α is just given by the periods of the holomorphic (3, 0) form. Eqs.(2.26) and (2.27)
allow to write all the relevant geometric quantities in terms of these periods. One can also
show that the metric Gij̄ = ∂i ∂¯j̄ K is equal to the Weil–Petersson metric on the Calai–Yau
moduli space. To see this, consider eq.(2.28) with ω replaced by Ω. Since H 3,0 (M ) is
one–dimensional, βi is cohomologous to fi Ω where fi is some holomorphic function of the
moduli ti . Using the first of eqs.(2.29), we have
                                                            Z
                                     ¯                ¯
                           Gij̄ = ∂i ∂j̄ K = −∂i ∂j̄ log           Ω̄ ∧ Ω
                                                              M
                                     R                    R               R                         (2.31)
                                        ∂¯j̄ Ω̄ ∧ ∂i Ω      ∂¯j̄ Ω̄ ∧ Ω Ω̄ ∧ ∂i Ω
                                =− R                    +           R        2   .
                                             Ω̄ ∧ Ω                   Ω̄ ∧ Ω

    Now, eq.(2.28) together with type considerations give
                     Z                        Z
                             Ω̄ ∧ ∂i Ω = fi           Ω̄ ∧ Ω,
                      M                           M
                 Z                       Z                                        Z
                                                              
                         ¯
                         ∂j̄ Ω̄ ∧ ∂i Ω =          µ̄j̄ ∧ Ω̄ ∧ µi ∧ Ω) + fi f¯j̄           Ω̄ ∧ Ω.
                  M                       M                                           M


Inserting these back into (2.31) we get
                                                  Z
                                  1                                
                     Gij̄ = − R                           µ̄j̄ ∧ Ω̄ ∧ µi ∧ Ω) ≡ µ̄j̄ , µi ),        (2.32)
                               M
                                 Ω̄ ∧ Ω
                                                  M


where ( · , · ) is the inner product on the bundle Ω0,1 ⊗ TM induced by (any) Calabi–Yau
metric on M . [The last equality in (2.32) is most easily seen by writing down the explicit
index structure of the various tensors involved]. By definition, the r.h.s. of (2.32) is

                                                              27
the Weil–Petersson metric on the Calabi–Yau moduli space. Comparing this result with
eq.(2.9), we also see that                 Z
                                                          
                                gij̄ = −         µ̄j̄ ∧ Ω̄ ∧ µi ∧ Ω).
                                           M

       We stress that Ω is well defined by the above conditions only up to multiplication by a
holomorphic function of the ti ’s. Clearly, two Ω’s differing for such a factor define the same
Hodge decomposition; therefore this ambiguity is immaterial in all the above discussion
and has no physical consequence (in particular the Zamolodchkikov metric is independent
of these choices). Instead the tensor Cijk gets multiplied by f (t)2 when Ω → f (t)Ω. This
behaviour reflects the basic fact that Cijk is a tensor with coefficients in the line bundle
L2 .
       For future reference, we give an alternative expression for the B–model 3–point func-
tions Cijk . As before, we start from the basic identity

                                      ∂i Ω = µi ∧ Ω + . . . ,                                 (2.33)

where the dots stand for a closed form of type (3, 0). Taking a second derivative

                                   ∂i ∂j Ω = µi ∧ µj ∧ Ω + . . .                              (2.34)

where now the dots denote closed forms of type (2, 1) and (3, 0). From (2.34) and consid-
erations of type we see that           Z
                                               Ω ∧ ∂i ∂j Ω = 0.
                                       M

Taking the derivative of this identity, we get
                      Z                      Z
                          ∂i Ω ∧ ∂j ∂k Ω = −             Ω ∧ ∂i ∂j ∂k Ω = Cijk .              (2.35)
                          M                          M

Note that replacing the derivatives in the l.h.s. of (2.35) by their explicit expressions (2.33)
and (2.34) the . . . do not contribute because of type considerations. So for our present
purposes we can ignore them.
       We introduce the following notation: A prime ′ means contraction of the vector indices
                                                                   ∨
with the holomorphic 3–form Ω, while a superscript                     means contraction of the form
indices with the unique holomorphic 3–vector dual to Ω. Obviously these two operations
are each others inverse (A′ )∨ = A, and (B ∨ )′ = B. In this notation (2.33) and (2.34) read

                                       (∂i Ω)∨ = µi + . . .

                                                    28
                                                                      ′
                      ∂i ∂j Ω = (µi ∧ µj )′ + . . . = (∂i Ω)∨ ∧ (∂j Ω)∨ + . . .

Replacing the second equation in (2.35) we get the formula we are looking for13
                    Z                               Z
                                   ∨
                                               
                                              ∨ ′
             Cijk = ∂i Ω ∧ (∂j Ω) ∧ (∂k Ω)        = ∂i Ω ∧ (∂j Ω)∨ ∧ ∂k Ω.               (2.36)
                        M                                       M

      The case of a Calabi–Yau n–fold (n > 3) is rather similar. As we saw, the Zamolod-
chikov metric Gij̄ is Kähler also in this case, again with potential − logh0̄|0i. On the other
hand the basic identity for its curvature, eq.(2.14) is going to change. To get the corre-
sponding identity for an n–fold, we have to go through the same steps as in (2.19). All the
step are unchanged, except for the last one. Then the following formula is valid for all n
(we use capital latin letters to denote charge 2 chiral primaries)

                                                       ¯
                         −Rij̄k l = eK Cik
                                        I
                                           gI J¯ Cj̄∗m̄J Gm̄l − Gkj̄ δil − Gij̄ δkl .


2.4. Coupling twisted N = 2 theory to gravity

      Bosonic string theory is in many ways like a twisted N = 2 theory [16], [17]. It has a
scalar supercharge QBRST = Q + Q, which is the usual BRST operator. It has anti-ghosts,
b, b of spin (2,0) and (0,2), with the property

                                               Q2 = b20 = 0

                                              {Q, b0 } = HL

and it has two U (1)’s, G, Ḡ corresponding to the left and right ghost numbers. Identifying

                                             2jBRST ↔ G+

                                                 b ↔ G−

                                                  bc ↔ J

and similarly for right-movers. Thus the notion of a physical state in the bosonic string
becomes exactly the same as that of a chiral state in the twisted theory. Thus we can
define coupling of twisted N = 2 theory to gravity by integrating correlation functions of
 13
      Recall that ∧ means exterior product with respect to the form indices and contraction with
respect to the vector indices.

                                                     29
chiral fields over moduli space of Riemann surface, with the insertion of G− ’s folded with
3g − 3 Beltrami differentials. In particular the partition function of the twisted N = 2
theory coupled to gravity at genus g > 1, Fg , can be defined by14

                                    Z           Y Z
                                             D 3g−3         Z          E
                             Fg =                  ( G µk )( Ḡ− µ̄k )
                                                      −
                                        Mg     k=1


where µi denote the Beltrami differentials, and Mg denotes the moduli space of genus
g Riemann surfaces. For F1 the answer can be written using the corresponding analysis
of the bosonic string case [18]. To do this note that in bosonic string one inserts bcbc to
absorb the ghost zero modes. This is translated in the twisted theory to the insertion of
left and right fermion number currents. Also, to fix the normalization it is best to write
the answer in the operator formulation which is particularly convenient for torus:
                                        Z
                                  1          d2 τ                        
                             F1 =                Tr (−1)F FL FR q HL q HR                     (2.37)
                                  2           τ2

where the factor of 1/2 in front takes care of the fact that there is a Z2 reflection symmetry
for all tori (this normalization is different from the one used in [19]). For genus 0, the 0,1,
and 2 point functions are zero, as is the case in bosonic string, and the three point functions
can be written as
                                             hφi φj φk i = Cijk .

In other words the chiral fields φi which after twisting have dimension zero play the same
                                                          (2)
role as ccVi in the usual bosonic strings, and φi               plays the same role as Vi .
      It is a rather nice property of twisted unitary N = 2 theories that Fg thus defined
is finite and thus well defined. The only potential divergence would have come from the
regions near the boundary of moduli space of Riemann surfaces. But in such cases, the
fact that the propagator on a long tube is given by G−    1      −
                                                     0 L0 +L̄0 Ḡ0 and that this annihilates
the massless modes, imply that only the massive modes propagate and thus the integrand
in Fg is exponentially small in these regions (the coefficient of exponent being fixed by the
first non-vanishing eigenvalue of L0 = L̄0 ).
      Despite an almost complete parallel between bosonic string and twisted N = 2 theories
coupled to gravity, there are two notable differences. The first one is that the ghost number
 14
      For the case of g = 2 one has to put a factor of 1/2 in front because all the g = 2 curves have
a Z2 symmetry.

                                                     30
violation in bosonic string at genus g is universal and is given by 3g −3, whereas for twisted
N = 2 theories it is given by (2.5) as ĉ(g−1). In particular we see that ĉ = 3 is a critical case
in that it gives the same degree of charge violation as bosonic string. So in particular this
suggests that Calabi–Yau 3-folds are a specially interesting class to consider [20]. Note that
only for ĉ = 3 the Fg has a chance to be non-zero for g > 1, by U (1) charge conservation.
For all the other values of ĉ, the only way to get non-zero result is by introducing other
correlators. The correlators involving chiral fields may be used to prevent vanishing of
                                                                            (2)
correlation functions only for 1 < ĉ; For ĉ ≤ 1 the charges of all φi           are negative (the
maximum being ĉ − 1) and so cannot be used to balance charges. In these cases, which
happen to be intensively studied in connection with matrix models, one needs to include
the full topological gravity multiplet and construct gravitational descendants which give
rise to non-vanishing correlation functions [20][21] [22]. Also for ĉ > 3 one needs fractional
chiral fields φi with charges between 0 < q < 1 in order to have a chance of balancing
the charges (gravitational descendants do not help in this case as they contribute +N
to charge violation condition). In particular for Calabi-Yau manifolds, which have no
fractional chiral states, with dimension bigger than 3 all the correlations vanish, and thus
the theory is not very interesting (except possibly for three point functions on the sphere
     P
with    qi = n and F1 which is computable and non-zero in general). For a Calabi-Yau
2-fold, which is either K3 or T 4 , the situation is hardly more interesting: all the correlation
functions vanish in the case of T 4 due to too many fermion zero modes and on K3 because
of charge conservation15 . Finally for the case of one–dimensional Calabi–Yau manifolds
only F1 is non–zero (as studied in [19]), due to charge conservation unless one introduces
gravitational descendants.
      So clearly as far as the twisted sigma–models coupled to gravity are concerned, the
most interesting case is the 3–fold Calabi–Yau case which will be the focus of our examples.
Actually we will consider the more general possibility of a unitary SCFT with ĉ = 3 with
integral U (1) charges for chiral fields. Many of the results we will discuss can be easily
generalized to other similar cases and would be interesting to study.
      The other major difference between the bosonic string and critical topological strings,
even if we choose ĉ = 3, is that in the case of topological strings obtained by twisting
 15
      In the case of K3 in principle there was a chance that genus g correlation function for g > 1
with g − 1 insertions of the highest charge chiral field which balances the charge lead to non-
vanishing of the amplitude. But in fact using the techniques in this paper, i.e. the holomorphic
anomaly equation in this case, one can show the amplitude still vanishes even with this insertion.

                                                31
unitary N = 2 theories, the G− cohomology is generically non–trivial whereas absolute
b–cohomology is always trivial in the bosonic strings. This, as we will see in the rest of the
paper is a crucial difference, and it leads to the anomaly discussed in detail in the next
section.
    The case of Calabi–Yau 3–fold as a string theory has already been studied in [23] for
both open and closed strings. In particular it was discovered there that in the case of
the open string theory, the target space physics is equivalent to three dimensional Chern–
Simon theory. In the case of closed strings there were some puzzles raised which we resolve
in connection with our discussion on the Kodaira–Spencer theory in section 5.

2.5. Properties of n–point functions and the holomorphicity paradox


    Consider the n–point functions of the N = 2 twisted theory coupled to gravity at
genus g
                    Cig1 i2 ...in =
                             Z     DZ          Z      Y Z
                                                     3g−3         Z         E                        (2.38)
                                       (2)       (2)
                        =             φi1 · · · φin      ( G µk )( Ḡ− µ̄k ) .
                                                            −
                            Mg                               k=1

We would like to relate this to Fg . At first sight one may think that Cig1 i2 ...in can be
written simply as
                                          Cig1 i2 ...in = ∂in1 i2 ...in Fg
However this formula cannot possibly be true since, as it is evident from its definition
(2.38) (and discussed in section 2.1), Fg is a section of L2−2g and Cig1 i2 ...in is a section of
the non–trivial vector bundle Symn T ⊗ L2−2g sitting over coupling space. Therefore acting
with ∂ik ’s on Fg makes no sense at all. Geometrically it is clear that the correct relation
should have the form
                                        Cig1 i2 ...in = Din . . . Di1 Fg                             (2.39)
where Di is some suitable connection compatible with the transition functions for the
appropriate bundles. On Symn T ⊗ L2−2g there is a natural connection Di i.e. the one
induced by the Zamolodckikov connection on T plus the canonical connection on L, see
section 2.3. It is natural to guess that (2.39) holds with Di replaced by this natural
connection Di . This is what we will presently argue. This will imply that the following
recursion relation (for 2g + n − 3 > 0) holds
       e2(1−g)K Gj̄i i1 Gj̄2 i2 · · · Gj̄n−1 in−1 Cig1 i2 ...in−1 in =
                                                                                                   (2.40)
                                = ∂in e2(1−g)K Gj̄i i1 Gj̄2 i2 · · · Gj̄n−1 in−1 Cig1 i2 ...in−1 .

                                                        32
       To show this, there are two things that we will have to argue: One is covariantization
with respect to the Zamolodchikov metric and the other is covariantization with respect
to the natural connection on L. Both will arise from contact terms. First let us discuss
how the covariantization with respect to the Zamolodchikov metric arises. This actually
has been done in full generality for marginal operators of conformal theory in [24] leading
to the following contact term in our case

                                       (2)          (2)                      (2)
                                      φi (z) φj (0) ∼ δ 2 (z)Γkij φk (0)

where Γkij is defined in section 2.3 and is the connection for the Zamolodchikov metric. This
amounts to the first thing we wished to show. However we would also like to rederive this
result using the tt∗ machinery: In defining the amplitude in (2.38) we have to be careful
to regularize the computation by making sure that two operators do not get closer to each
other than distance ǫ. However, when we take derivative of Fg with respect to ti this region
is not excluded. Therefore the difference between the explicit meaning of the correlation
and the derivative with respect to ti will include the regularization of the integration of
 (2)                                         (2)
φi     in a small neighborhood of φj               for all j’s. Since this is a local computation we may as
well do it on a hemisphere, where we can apply tt∗ equations. In such a case the integral
       (2)                                                          (2)                             (2)
of φi        over the hemisphere including the field φj                   in it minus the one with φj     outside
of the hemisphere, is equal to, as far as the topological states are concerned [2]

                          −
                                                    h                             i
                                      (2)                  k (2)              (2)
                      G− G  ∂
                       −1 −1 i |ji − φj   ∂ i |0i →  (A  )  φ
                                                        i j k    − (A  )
                                                                      i 0
                                                                         0
                                                                           · φj    |0i

                                                                    (2)            (2)
                            = [(g −1 )kj ∂i gjj + ∂i Kδjk ]φk |0i = Γkij φk |0i.
                                                      (2)
Therefore we see that the insertion of φi                     in the correlation is equivalent to

                                                          ∂i − Γi

as was to be shown.
       Now we turn to the second covariantization, i.e., with respect to the line bundle
connection on L. This arises from the hidden contact term between the term we added to
the action to twist the supersymmetric theory
                                Z                         Z
                            1                     1
                                    J ω̄ + c.c. =             Rϕ + total derivatives
                            2                     2

                                                              33
                      (2)
and the operator φi , as J has a contact term with it. Here ω is the spin connection and
ϕ is the scalar which bosonizes the U (1) current. To study this term, again we use the
fact that it is local, and that we can thus first study the case of the hemisphere to which
we can apply tt∗ considerations. The same argument as above leads to the contact term

                                           (Ai )00 · 1 = −∂i K · 1
                                                                          R
More generally, since the contribution due to this term is proportional to R, and the
                                                      R
above computation was done on hemisphere with net R = 2π, we can write the above
term more generally as
                                               R
                                                  −∂i K
                                               2π
On genus g surface this leads to an integrated contact term

                                               −∂i K(2 − 2g)
                      R      (2)
and so insertion of         φi     in the correlation amount to covariantization also with respect
                       2−2g
to the line bundle L             which leads us to our final answer for the operator insertion
                                    Z
                                        (2)
                                       φi → ∂i − Γi − (2 − 2g)∂iK                            (2.41)

                                                                               R    (2)
Note that this is consistent with the fact that the insertion of                   φi     should not lead to
any further ambiguities in fixing the normalization of the path integral. In particular
exp[(2g − 2)K] · Fg is independent of such ambiguity as far as holomorphic derivatives are
concerned as the K varies precisely to compensate the ambiguity of Fg as discussed in
                                                                                        (2)
section 2.1. Note in particular that the symmetry in exchange of φi                           is consistent with
the above relation with covariantization since

                                                            (g)
                                       Di1 Di2 . . . Din−3 Cin−2 in−1 in

is symmetric in all its n indices. This is a consequence of [Di , Dj ] = 0 (i.e. the curvature
of the natural connection has type (1, 1)) (for the case of genus 0 we also need the fact
that Di Cjkl is totally symmetric in its four indices, see eq.(2.13)).
    Now that we have understood how covariantizations arise we are going to present a
                                                                     (2)
formal argument for decoupling of anti-chiral operators φ̄ī               from the correlation functions.
Let us consider the correlations on the sphere:
                                D                       Z         Z     E
                                                          (2)       (2)
                  Ci1 i2 ...in = φi1 (0) φi2 (1) φi3 (∞) φi4 · · · φin .                                  (2.42)

                                                      34
If the BRST–trivial states do decouple from the physical amplitudes, then the n–point
functions Ci1 ...in should depend holomorphically on the couplings ti . Indeed,one has

    ∂¯j̄ Ci1 i2 ...in =
          Z                                   Z         Z     I                                    I                    E
              √ 2 D                             (2)       (2)                                                                (2.43)
     =           g d z φi1 (0) φi2 (1) φi3 (∞) φi4 · · · φin                               G +
                                                                                                            Ḡ+ φ̄j̄ (z) ,
                                                                                     Cz′               Cz

where Cz and Cz′ are small contours enclosing the point z. Now we can deform the Cz′
countour around the other operator insertions. Since
                            I
                                G+ φi (w) = 0,
                             C
                            I w
                                     (2)      (0,1)     (0,1)
                                G+ φi = ∂φi         = dφi ,
                                            Cw

we get
                                          n Z
                                          X                D                               Z
                                              √                                                        (2)
                  ∂¯j̄ Ci1 i2 ...in = −                2
                                                     gd z φi1 (0)φi2 (1)φi3 (∞)                    φi4 · · · ×
                                          k=4
                                                               Z                 Z             I                       E
                                                                      (0,1)            (2)                                   (2.44)
                                                           ×        dφik · · ·        φin               Ḡ+ φ̄j̄ (z)
                                                                                                 Cz
                                 formally
                                    =           0,
        R     (0,1)
since       dφi= 0. This formal manipulation can be extended to the n–point functions
                                                R
at genus g (2.38). Since the BRST variation of ( G− µk ) produces the energy momentum
tensor folded in the Beltrami differential, the additional terms arising from the deformation
of the countour have the form of the derivative of some correlation function with respect
to the moduli of the complex surface just as it happens in the bosonic string theory; hence
they are also expected to vanish upon integration over the (compactified) moduli space of
genus g Riemann surfaces Mg .
    However, this consequence of the decoupling of BRST–trivial states is in contradiction
with what we know from tt∗ geometry as we will now see. This contradiction leads to a
paradox that will be resolved by the discovery of a new ‘holomorphic’ anomaly, which
will be discussed in the next section. The point is that holomorphicity of the n–point
functions (for n > 3) is not consistent with the recursion relation (2.39). Indeed, ∂¯j̄
does not commute with Di : Rather [∂¯j̄ , Di ] is the non–vanishing curvature of the natural
connection. For instance, consider the 4–point function Cijkl = Dl Cijk . Since ∂C¯ ijk = 0,
we have
                        ∂¯m̄ Cijkl = ∂¯m̄ Dl Cijk = [∂¯m̄ , Dl ]Cijk =
                                    = 2Glm̄ Cijk − (Rlm̄i n Cnjk + 2 permutations),

                                                               35
where Rlm̄i n is the curvature of the Zamolodchikov metric. To see that the r.h.s. is indeed
not zero, replace this curvature by its explicit expression given by special geometry.
    As we shall see in the next section, in higher genus the situation is even worse, since
there the partition function Fg is also not holomorphic.
    What is the way out of this paradox, i.e. where is the loop–hole in the naive argument
around eq.(2.44)? The point is that although it is true that we remain with a sum of
                           R (0,1)
terms each with an operator dφi     inserted (cf.(2.44)), these terms do not vanish upon
integration over the Riemann surface, because the corresponding integral gets a non–
                                          (0,1)
trivial boundary term when the field φi           approaches a point where some other operator
is inserted. Indeed the n–point function on the sphere should be written more invariantly
as an integral over the moduli space M0,n of a sphere with n punctures. The configurations
where two points get close together make the boundary of this space. Then, taking ∂¯j̄ of
the n–point function and deforming contours as in eq.(2.44) we get the integral over M0,n
of an exact top form. But, since the boundary of M0,n is not empty (for n > 3), this does
not mean that the integral itself vanishes. However, ∂¯j̄ Ci ...i may get a contribution only
                                                              1   n

from the boundary of M0,n . Since the boundary corresponds to two operators colliding,
we see that the n–point function may fail to be holomorphic only because of contact terms.
This is precisely what we found by the explicit computation above.
    In the next section we shall see how this holomorphic anomaly appears in higher genus.
There again we shall find that ∂¯j̄ C g   gets contribution only from the boundary of the
                                     i1 ...in
moduli space of genus g surfaces with n punctures Mg,n . However, since in this case the
boundary has more components, new interesting phenomena will appear.


    2.6. Canonical coordinates and special coordinates

    Before turning to the next section we would like to make one comment about covari-
antization which will be both useful for us later as well as clarifying the relation to some
work already in the literature: In topological theories it is well known that the insertion of
chiral fields can be represented by ordinary derivatives [25] . This is also implicitly used in
the discussion of counting of holomorphic curves using the topological sigma–models [4].
What we have said so far seems to be at odds with these work. In fact not only there is
no contradiction but actually clarifying the relation of our work to these will explain some
of the ansatz made in the study of mirror map [7]. The point is that if we start from a

                                                  36
unitary N = 2 theory which we denote by S0 , twist it and then perturb only by topological
fields                                                     Z
                                S = S0 (t0 , t0 ) +            d2 zd2 θ δti φi

there are no infinities and one could be naive in taking field insertions on the world sheet.
In other words we do not have to prevent points approaching each other by cutting out
small discs around each field insertion. In fact as we mentioned it was rather important in
derivation of various properties of the topological correlations to take ordinary derivatives
of partition function to obtain topological correlations. It turns out that this is possible as
                                                                                         i
long as we are only interested in topological correlations and for a fixed t0 . This is possible
because of (2.2), in other words, the fact that

                                                [Di , Dj ] = 0

means that for a fixed base point (t0 , t0 ), shifting t alone can be accomplished by ordinary
derivative, i.e., we can choose a gauge in which Di → ∂i . This being true means that
we are taking a choice of coordinates on the moduli space as well as a gauge for the line
bundle on the moduli space so that

                          ∂i1 ...∂in Γkij               = 0 = ∂j1 ...∂jr K                   (2.45)
                                            (t0 ,t0 )                        (t0 ,t0 )


It turns out that these conditions fix the choice of coordinates and line bundle section |0i
up to linear transformation, and can be done for arbitrary Kähler manifolds with arbitrary
line bundles on it having real analytic metrics.
     Let us first talk about the line bundle. Consider a local section near t0 and let the
norm of this section be e−K . In arbitrary coordinate system K has the following expansion
K(z, z̄) = K0 (z) + z̄ m Fm̄ (z) + o(z̄ 2 ) where we take the t0 to correspond to z = 0. By
redefining the choice of the local holomorphic section we can get rid of K0 which is purely
holomorphic. With this choice of local section all holomorphic derivatives of K are equal
to zero at the origin. So such a section exists. Moreover it is unique up to multiplication
by a constant because any z dependence will give rise to a non-constant K0 which will
thus violate the condition that holomorphic derivatives of ∂i K vanish at the origin.
     Now we show that the same can be done for the Christoffel connection. On a Kähler
manifold there is locally a Kähler potential, which we again denote by K, and which can be
expanded as above, and with a choice of gauge K0 can be chosen to be zero. The expansion

                                                         37
for the metric follows from the expansion for Kähler potential Gkm̄ = ∂k Fm̄ (z) + o(z̄).
Making the holomorphic change of variables z i → ti such that

                                 ∂z k
                                      ∂k Fm̄ (z) = Cim̄ = const,                            (2.46)
                                 ∂ti

or, explicitly, ti = C im̄ Fm̄ (z), one reduces metric to the form Gkm̄ = Cim̄ + o(z̄). The
ambiguity in t-coordinates is in the choice of constant matrix Cim̄ and it is parametrized
by GL(n). In t-coordinates holomorphic Christoffel symbols vanish at the origin (z̄ = 0)
together with all holomorphic derivatives as was to be shown. We shall call the coordinates
ti and the choice of local trivialization of the line bundle in which (2.45) holds canonical
coordinates with respect to the base–point t0 .
      To relate to some comments made in the literature, we would like to draw attention
to a natural base point in the case of A–model, and that is infinite volume t0 = ∞. In this
case the gauge choice (2.45) implies that we must have ∂i K              vanish which explains the
                                                                   t→∞
gauge choice made in finding the mirror map in [7] (in particular the normalization of the
holomorphic three form one needs is in the gauge where ∂i K = ∂i logh0|0i               = 0). It is
                                                                                  t→∞
in this gauge that the path integral for the A–model is given by a sum over holomorphic
maps and thus this is the right gauge in order to count these maps. We will now discuss
this in more detail.
      The crucial property of the canonical coordinates with base point at infinity16 is that,
for an appropriate choice of the matrix Cim̄ , they coincide with the special coordinates
(in the sense of special geometry). Since eq.(2.45) completely characterize the canonical
coordinates, it is enough to show that the special coordinates satisfy this equation with
t̄0 = ∞. For convenience, we show this in the context of the B–model, using the periods of
the holomorphic 3–form. The argument can be easily extended to the general case using
the more abstract methods of section 2.3. The key formula is (2.26)


                                         e−K = ̟ † E̟,                                      (2.47)

 16
      By ‘point at infinity’ we mean the following. For the A–model a point where the volume
of the Calai–Yau manifold is infinite, i.e. the weak coupling limit. For the B–model we mean a
degeneration point in the complex moduli space around which the nilpotent part of the monodromy
is maximal. As it is well known, this is ‘infinite volume’ from the mirror viewpoint.

                                               38
where ̟ α are the periods in a symplectic basis. ̟ depends holomorphically on the moduli.
Let si (i = 1, 2, . . . , m) be the ‘special coordinates’ and put Xi = X0 si , where X0 is a
holomorphic coordinate along the fiber of L. Then the periods take the form

                                         ̟ t = (X0 , Xi , ∂X0 F , ∂Xi F ),

where F is a holomorphic function of X0 , Xi homogeneous of degree 2. We have introduced
the homogeneous coordinates XI (I = 0, 1, . . . , m) because ̟ takes value in the line bundle
L; then X0 corresponds to the freedom in the choice of trivialization of L. The condition
that ̟ is a section of L also explains the homogeneity condition on F . We want to take
the limit s̄j → ∞ in eq.(2.47) while keeping si generic. We need the behaviour of the
periods ̟ ∗ (s̄) as s̄ → ∞. This behaviour is described by the Schimd orbit theorems [26]:
As s → ∞ one has

                                                dijk Xi Xj Xk
                            F (X0 , Xi ) =                    + cX02 + O(e2πis ),
                                                     X0

for some non–degenerate numbers dijk . Given the ‘factorized’ form of eq.(2.47), taking the
limit s̄j → ∞ while keeping si fixed is a well defined procedure. More precisely, we make
s̄i → λ̄s̄i and send λ̄ to infinity. In this limit one has (up to exponentially small terms)

                     ̟ † = X̄0 (1, λ̄s̄i , −λ̄3 dijk s̄i s̄j s̄k k + 2c∗ , 3d¯ijk λ̄2 d¯ijk s̄j s̄k ).

Therefore
                                                            3
                                                            X
                                                  −K
                                                 e      =         λ̄r Ar ,                                   (2.48)
                                                            r=0

with
                                            A3 = |X0 |2 d¯ijk s̄i s̄j s̄k
                                            A2 = −3|X0 |2 d¯ijk si s̄j s̄k
                                            A1 = X̄0 s̄i ∂i F
                                            A0 = X̄0 F − 2c∗ |X0 |2 .

Notice that in the special coordinates A3 and A2 take a universal form (that is, they are
independent of F ). From (2.47), (2.48) one has

            K = − log X0 − log X̄0 − log[λ̄3 dīj̄ k̄ s̄i s̄j s̄k − 3λ̄2 dīj̄ k̄ si s̄j s̄k ] + O(λ̄−1 ),

                                                            39
and then the Zamolodchikov metric reads

                                                1
                           Gij̄ = ∂i ∂ j̄ K =     L (s̄) + O(λ̄−3 ),                (2.49)
                                                λ2 ij̄

where Lij̄ (s̄) is a non–degenerate anti–holomorphic matrix. On the other hand,

                     K = − log X0 + (anti − holomorphic) + O(λ̄−1 ).                (2.50)

Thus, taking the base point t̄0 be at infinity, the canonical gauge for L defined by the
second of (2.45) is just X0 = 1, which is the standard gauge in special geometry. Moreover
as λ̄ → ∞ the (1, 0) part of the Christoffel connection Di becomes the trivial one. Indeed
using (2.49)
                              Di = G∂i G−1 = ∂i + O(λ̄−1 ),                         (2.51)

which shows that the special coordinates si satisfy (2.45) at infinity and hence can be
identified with the canonical coordinates ti with respect to this base point.




                                                40
3. Holomorphic anomaly

    In the topological theory, the BRST invariance would imply that partition functions
and correlation functions are holomorphic on the moduli space of the theory since variation
                                                                                                                                     (2)
with respect to the anti-holomorphic moduli t̄i inserts the BRST trivial operator φ̄ī                                                     =
        +
{G+ , [G , φī ]}. This indeed is the case for the Yukawa coupling. However we saw in the
previous section that the holomorphicity is, in general, not consistent with the covariance
on the moduli space. This means that there is something wrong with the assumption
on the BRST invariance. What we saw there is reminiscent of the chiral anomaly in the
Yang-Mills theory where one finds that it is not possible to preserve both the vector and
the chiral gauge invariances of the theory. Thus we call this phenomenon the holomorphic
anomaly. In this section, we will uncover a subtle breakdown of the BRST invariance in
the twisted N = 2 model coupled to the gravity, and rederive the non-holomorphicity we
found in the previous section as a special case.

3.1. Homolorphic anomalies of partition functions

    Let us first examine the partition function Fg for g ≥ 2. The naive BRST invariance
would imply ∂ ī Fg = 0. We are going to show that this is not the case. The derivative with
                i
respect to t is generated by an insertion of the anti-chiral field φī as
                        Z           Z          I              I                        3g−3 Z
                                                                                        Y                          Z
       ∂                                 2                +                 +                                  −            −
           i
               Fg =          [dm]       d zh          G                 G φī (z)                   µa G                µa G iΣg
      ∂t                Mg                      Cz                Cz′                   a=1
                        Z           X Z
                                    3g−3              Z                 Z              YZ                      YZ
                                                                                                           −                    −
                    =        [dm]          h    φī       2µb T               2µb̄ T          µa G                       µā G iΣg   (3.1)
                        Mg                                                             a6=b
                                    b,b̄=1                                                                     ā6=b̄
                        Z           3g−3
                                    X                             Z           YZ                  YZ
                                                 ∂2                                           −                         −
                    =        [dm]            4          h               φī            µa G                     µā G iΣg .
                        Mg                     ∂mb ∂mb̄
                                    b,b̄=1                                    a6=b                ā6=b̄


In the first line of this equation, the contours Cz and Cz′ are around the point z where the
anti-chiral φī is inserted. We then moved these contours around the Riemann surface Σg ,
                                   H                            H    +   −
and picked up the commutators, Cw G+ · G− (w) = 2T (w) and Cw G · G (w̄) = 2T (w̄).
The insertions of T and T are then converted into the derivatives with respect to the
moduli m, m̄ of Σg . Using the Cauchy theorem, we can reduce the r.h.s. to an integral on
the boundary of the moduli space Mg .
    The boundary of Mg consists of ([ 21 g]+1) irreducible components Dgr (r = 0, 1, ..., [ 21 g])
each of which consists of surfaces with nodes. Surfaces belonging to Dg0 are such that they

                                                                        41
become connected surfaces of genus (g − 1) with two punctures upon removal of the nodes.
On the other hand, Dgr (r ≥ 1) consists of surfaces which become, upon removal of the
nodes, two disconnected surfaces, one of genus r and one of genus (g − r), each with one
puncture.
    A surface which sits in the neighbourhood of Dg0 has a long tube which becomes a
node as the surface approaches Dg0 . Thus we can choose coordinates near Dg0 as 4–tuple
(τ, m′ , z, w) where τ is the length and the twist of the tube and it serves as a transverse
coordinate to Dg0 (the surface approaches Dg0 as τ → ∞), while (m′ , z, w) are moduli of a
genus–(g − 1) surface with two punctures (where z and w denote the moduli corresponding
to the two punctures) which is obtained by removing the node from the surface.
    The contribution of the boundary component Dg0 to ∂ ī Fg is given as follows. Because
of the second–order derivative in r.h.s. with respect to mb and mb̄ , at the boundary we
will be left with a derivative in the direction normal to Dg0 . In the coordinates (τ, m′ , z, w),
                                        ∂
the normal derivative is expressed as ∂Im τ
                                            . In the limit τ → ∞, the Beltrami-differentials
µ(z) and µ(w) associated to the moduli z and w become localized near the punctures, i.e.
                                     Z               I
                                               −
                                         (z)
                                         µ     G →            G− ,
                                                         Cz


while those associated to the moduli m′ reduces to the Beltrami-differentials µ′ on the
genus–(g − 1) surface Σg−1 . Thus the contribution of Dg0 is given by
             Z                          Z     I       I         I       I
                      ′            ∂               −          −       −        −
                   [dm , dz, dw]      h   φī     G         G       G         G ×
               Dg0               ∂Im τ Σg      Cz       Cz′      Cw      Cw′

                                                3g−6 Z              Z                       (3.2)
                                                 Y                             −
                                                               ′ −
                                              ×              µa G         µ′a G iΣg
                                                   a=1    Σg−1       Σg−1


    Let us examine the integrand of (3.2). Since the operator φī is integrated over the
entire surface Σg it either sits on the tube which will be stretched out in the limit τ → ∞ or
lies outside of the tube which becomes the genus–(g − 1) surface Σg−1 in this limit. When
φī sits outside of the tube (see Fig. 2), states which propagate on the tube are projected
onto the ground states in the limit τ → ∞. Since the ground states are generated by the
chiral fields, the effect of a node on the degenerate surface can be represented by insertions
of φj (z) and φk (w) on the points z and w where the node is attached, and the node itself

                                                42
is replaced by the ground state metric η jk . In the coordinates (τ, m, z, w), the integrand
becomes                         I           I                        I              I
                   ∂        D                              −                                 −
                                        −                                       −
                       η jk             G            G φj (z)               G               G φk (w)×
                 ∂Im τ           Cz           Cz′                      Cw            Cw
                                                                                      ′

                                    Z                3g−6 Z
                                                     Y                          Z                        E
                                                                                                    −
                                ×             φī                      µ′a G−               µ′a G                   .
                                      Σg−1                      Σg−1                Σg−1                     Σg−1
                                                     a=1

This turns out to be zero since the correlation function in the above is defined on Σg−1
and does not depend on the coordinate τ . Thus, when φī lies outside of the tube, there is
no contribution from the component Dg0 to ∂ ī Fg .




                               - -             - -
                              GG             GG
                                                                                                 ∫φi
                                        Imτ

          Fig. 2: Contributions from the boundary of moduli space where φī is
          outside the long tube vanishes.


    Let us turn to the case when φī sits on the tube (see Fig. 3). Suppose φī is away from
both ends of the tube. In this case, states on both sides of φī on the tube are projected
onto the ground states. Thus the effect of the node is represented by an insertion of
                                                            Z
                                              jj ′     ′                    ′
                                    φj (z)η          hj |       φī |k ′ iη k k φk (w)

                                R
on Σg−1 . Here the integral         φī is over the tube away from both ends. Since


                   hj|φī |ki = hj̄|φ̄ī |k̄iMjj̄ Mkk̄ = C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj̄j Gk̄k ηj ′ j ηk′ k
                                                                                        ′    ′




is independent of the position of φī , we can replace the integral by the multiplication of
the volume of the domain of the integral which can be approximated by the volume Im τ
of the tube when τ → ∞. When φī is close to one of the ends of the tube, the amplitude

                                                                43
does not scale like the volume Im τ , and such a configuration can be neglected in this
approximation. The integrand of (3.2) then becomes
                                    DI    I          I                                I
                        2K j j̄ kk̄     −    −                                   −                 −
             C īj̄ k̄ e G G           G    G φj (z)                             G             G φk (w)×
                                       Cz         Cz′                    Cw               Cw
                                                                                           ′

                                                3g−6 Z               Z                E                                   (3.3)
                                                 Y                             −
                                            ×             µ′a G−          µ′a G
                                                                                          Σg−1
                                                a=1

                                                                     ∂
where the volume factor Im τ is cancelled by the normal derivative ∂Im τ
                                                                         . This remains
finite in the limit τ → ∞.




                                 - -          - -
                                GG          GG
                                                                         ∫φi
                                       Imτ

          Fig. 3: The contribution from the boundary of moduli space comes
          from the configuration where φī is on the long tube of length Imτ as
          τ → ∞.

     We need to integrate (3.3) over the boundary component Dg0 which is parametrized
by m′ ∈ Mg−1 and z, w ∈ Σg−1 . Since the interchange of the two points z and w does
not change the complex structure of the punctured surface, we should include a factor of
(1/2) if we are to integrate z and w over the entire surface Σg−1 without a constraint. The
contribution of the boundary component Dg0 to ∂ ī Fg is then expressed as
                            Z               DZ           Z           3g−6 Z
                                                                     Y                         Z               E
       1                                          (2)          (2)                                         −
         C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄          [dm ]′
                                                 φj           φk                     µ′a G−        µ′a G                  (3.4)
       2 īj̄ k̄            Mg−1                                     a=1
                                                                                                                   Σg−1


     The expression (3.4) can be further simplified by the condition ĉ = 3. In general,
when C īj̄ k̄ 6= 0, the left and the right U (1) charges of the three chiral fields φi , φj and φk
should sum up to be ĉ.
                                 qj + qk + qi = qj + qk + qi = ĉ

In the present situation, ĉ = 3 and qi = qi = 1. Therefore we must have qj + qk = q j + q k =
                                                 (2)                     −
2. Furthermore, if qj = 0 or q j = 0, φj                = {G− , [G , φj ]} = 0 since a chiral state with

                                                         44
q = 0 is annihilated by both G+ and G− . Therefore we can restrict j and k in (3.3) to
those with (qj , qj ) = (qk , qk ) = (1, 1). These are the ones which correspond to the marginal
                                                                                        R (2)
deformations of the twisted N = 2 model, and we can replace the insertions of φj in
(3.4) by a derivative Dj . The contribution (3.4) of the boundary component Dg0 to ∂ ī Fg
is then expressed as
                             1
                               C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Dj Dk Fg−1 .                       (3.5)
                             2 īj̄ k̄
    Let us turn to the other boundary components Dgr (r = 1, ..., [ 21 g]). A surface in
the neighborhood of Dgr , has a long tube which connects two disconnected surfaces Σr
and Σg−r of genus r and genus (g − r). Thus we can choose coordinates near Dgr as
5–tuple (τ, m′ , z, m′′ , w) where τ characterizes the tube connecting the two surfaces, and
(m′ , z) ∈ Mr,1 and (m′′ , w) ∈ Mg−r,1 . As in the case of Dg0 discussed in the above, a
non-vanishing contribution to ∂ ī Fg comes from the region where the amplitude scales like
Im τ . This is the case when the operator φī is on the tube (see Fig. 4). The factor Im τ is
                                       ∂
cancelled by the derivative operator ∂Im τ
                                           and the effect of the tube is represented by the
operator
                                  ′                        ′
                   φj (z)η jj hj ′ |φī |k ′ iη k k φk (w) = C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ φj (z)φk (w)

where φj (z) is inserted on Σr and φk (z) is on Σg−r . The contribution of Dgr to ∂ ī Fg is
then given by
                                                 Z                  Z          3r−3 Z
                                                                                Y                  Z
                                                                         (2)                                 −
                          2K
                C īj̄ k̄ e    G G j j̄    kk̄
                                                          [dm ]h′
                                                                        φj               µ′a G−        µ′a G iΣr ×
                                                  Mr                           a=1
                              Z                           Z           3(g−r)−3 Z
                                                                        Y                      Z
                                                                (2)                                      −
                          ×                 [dm ]h   ′′
                                                               φk                    µ′′a G−       µ′′a G iΣg−r =
                                  Mg−r                                  a=1
                               2K         j j̄   kk̄
                 = C īj̄ k̄ e        G G Dj Fr Dk Fg−r .


                                                                                 ∫φi




                                                       - -                                - -
                                                      GG                                GG
                                                                         Imτ

           Fig. 4: Another component of the boundary of moduli space where the
           Riemann surface splits to two Riemann surfaces connected by a long
           tube; to get a nonvanishing contribution φī is inserted on the tube.

                                                                        45
     Extra care is required when g is even and r = 21 g. In this case there is a Z2 symmetry
between the two surfaces Σr and Σg−r , and we must include a factor (1/2) to take into ac-
count this symmetry. The contributions of the boundary components Dg,k (k = 1, ..., [ 21 g])
are then
                                  [ 12 g]
                                  X
                                            C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Dj Fr Dk Fg−r
                                  r=1

if g is odd and
           1
           2 g−1
            X                                           1
                C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Dj Fr Dk Fg−r + C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Dj F 12 g Dk F 12 g
            r=1
                                                        2

if g is even. They can be summarized in a single equation as

                                    g−1
                                 1X
                                      C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Dj Fr Dk Fg−r
                                 2 r=1 īj̄ k̄

     By combining this with (3.5), we obtain the holomorphic anomaly of the genus–g
partition function as

                                                                          g−1
                                                                                                !
                        1                                                 X
               ∂ ī Fg = C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄       Dj Dk Fg−1 +            Dj Fr Dk Fg−r       .   (3.6)
                        2                                                 r=1


This gives a recursion relation for Fg with respect to the genus g. In fact, it is possible to
solve this equation iteratively, and we will present a systematic method to do so in Section
6.
     The holomorphic anomaly equations of Fg ’s for all g ≥ 2 can be combined into a single
equation by introducing a formal sum of Fg ’s as

                                                            ∞
                                                            X
                                            F (λ; t, t) =         λ2g−2 Fg .                            (3.7)
                                                            g=1


Since each Fg is a section of a line-bundle L2−2g over the moduli space of the topological
theory, F (λ; t, t) should be regarded as a function on the total space of L, with λ being a
coordinate on the fiber of L. We then consider the following equation.

                                             λ2
                     ∂ ī − ∂ ī F1 exp(F ) =    C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ D̂j D̂k exp(F )                       (3.8)
                                              2 īj̄ k̄
                                                           46
where                                             X
                         D̂j F (λ; t, t) ≡             λ2g−2 Dj Fg
                                                   g
                                                  X
                                              =        λ2g−2 (∂j − (2g − 2)∂j K)Fg
                                                   g

                                              = (∂j − ∂j Kλ∂λ )F (λ; t, t).
By expanding both-hand sides of (3.8) in power series of λ and by comparing each term
in the expansion, we recover the holomorphic anomaly equation (3.6). We call this the
master anomaly equation of the topological string theory. It is satisfying to see that the
holomorphic anomalies for all g ≥ 2 are summarized in a single equation. Later we will
further improve this equation to incorporate the genus–1 anomaly equation.
      As we will solve the holomorphic anomaly equation (3.6) later, it is instructive to check
the integrability of the equation here. Since the holomorphic anomaly is summarized in
the master equation (3.8), it is sufficient to prove

                           [dī , dj̄ ] = 0
                                                            λ2
                           dī = ∂ ī − ∂ ī F1 −              C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ D̂j D̂k .
                                                            2 īj̄ k̄
By using the special geometry relation

                     [∂ ī , Dj ]lk = −Gīj δkl − Gīk δjl + Cjkm C īl̄m̄ e2K Gmm̄ Gl̄l            (3.9)

and the properties of the Yukawa coupling

                                   C īj̄ k̄ =C j̄ īk̄ ,     Dī C j̄ k̄l̄ = Dj̄ C īk̄l̄
                                               ∂i C j̄ k̄l̄ = 0,

we find the commutator to be
                                                                     1
               [dī , dj̄ ] = λ2 C īk̄l̄ e2K Gkk̄ Gll̄ (∂k ∂ j̄ F1 − TrCk C j̄ )∂l − (ī ↔ j̄)+
                                                                     2
                                    2
                                 λ
                              + C īk̄l̄ e2K Gkk̄ Gll̄ Dk ∂l ∂ j̄ F1 − (ī ↔ j̄).
                                  2
That the r.h.s. of this equation is zero is the consequence of the holomorphic anomaly
equation17 of F1
                                                        1             χ
                                     ∂i ∂ j̄ F1 =         Tr Ci C j̄ − Gij̄                        (3.10)
                                                        2             24
 17
      The holomorphic anomaly equation for F1 here differs by a factor (1/2) to the one presented
in [19] due to the different normalization of F1 .

                                                              47
where χ = Tr(−1)F . Substituting this into the above, we obtain

                                     λ2 h                                                 i
                    [dī , dj̄ ] =       C īk̄l̄ e2K Gkk̄ Gll̄ Tr(Dk Cl )C j̄ − (ī ↔ j̄) = 0.
                                     4
Here we also used Di Cjkl = Dj Cikl . It is curious to see that both the special geometry
relation and the genus–1 anomaly equation play important roles in proving the consistency
of the holomorphic anomaly at g ≥ 2. This in fact is not without a reason. We will see later
that the special geometry relation can be regarded as a holomorphic anomaly equation at
genus–0, and the anomalies at all genera including g = 0 and 1 can be described in a single
framework.
                                                                                        +
    Now that we found the BRST–trivial operator {G+ , [G , φī ]} does not decouple from
Fg , one might wonder whether Fg is sensitive to still other types of BRST-trivial defor-
mations of the topological theory. The (c, c) field φi which generate the truly marginal
deformation of the topological theory satisfies
                                                                       +
                                                  [G+ , φi ] = [G , φi ] = 0,

and the (a, a) field φī which is complex conjugate to φi obeys
                                                                       −
                                                  [G− , φī ] = [G , φī ] = 0.

However the topological theory realized by the twisted N = 2 model may also contain a
(a, c) field φe subject to
                                                         e = [G+ , φ]
                                                   [G− , φ]        e =0

and its conjugate (c, a) field. Thus we would like to know if Fg is sensitive to a deformation
                                                                                     −
generated by these operators. We show here that, in fact, the operator {G+ , [G , φ]}   e and
its conjugate decouple from Fg .
    If we insert such an operator on Σg , we can deform the contour of G+ surrounding the
                                                     R
operator φe and pick up the commutator of G+ with µa G− (a = 1, ..., 3g − 3) inserted on
Σg . The commutator produces the energy-momentum tensor T which is then converted
into a derivative with respect to the moduli m.
          Z               Z          I             I                   3g−3 Z
                                                                       Y                   Z
                                                              −                                      −
                   [dm]        2
                              d zh            +
                                              G                e
                                                             G φ(z)              µa G  −
                                                                                               µa G i =
             Mg                          Cz            Cz′             a=1
                                                                                                   3g−3 Z
               Z              3g−3
                              X          ∂
                                                  Z           Z
                                                                       −        YZ                 Y            −
           =          [dm]            2                  2
                                                       d zh            e
                                                                     G φ(z)             µa G   −
                                                                                                            µa G i.
               Mg                       ∂mb                    Cz′                                 ā=1
                              b=1                                               a6=b


                                                                  48
Due to the derivative with respect to mb , this becomes an integral on the boundary of Mg .
It turns out that the boundary term vanishes for the following reason. So far we have not
         R     −
touched µa G in the right-moving sector, and there are still (3g − 3) of them on Σg . In
                                                                                                      −
the neighbourhood of Dgr (r = 0, 1, ..., [ 21 g]), one of them becomes a contour integral of G
                                                                                        −
around the tube which becomes a node on Dgr . Namely we have the G charge inserted on
the tube. As the surface approaches the boundary, states which propagate on the tube are
                                                                                   −
projected onto the ground states, all of which are annihilated by G . It does not matter
                        −
                           e is on or off the tube since it anti-commutes with G− . In this
whether the operator [G , φ]
                                                −                                R      −
way, the boundary term vanishes due to the G charge which comes from one of µa G .
                                                        −
                                                           e decouples from Fg . Similarly
Since there is no boundary term, the operator {G+ , [G , φ]}
Fg is invariant under the deformation generated by (c, a) fields.
    In the case of the topological sigma–model of A–type described in Section 2, the (c, c)
and (a, a) fields generate deformations of the Kähler class on the Calabi-Yau manifold M
while the (a, c) and (c, a) fields correspond to deformations of the complex structure. The
result here suggests that Fg in this case is independent of the complex structure of M ,
but depends on the Kähler class on M . The anti-holomorphic dependence of Fg on the
Kähler moduli is determined by the holomorphic anomaly equation (3.6). The situation is
opposite in the case of the B–model. In this case, Fg does not depend on the Kähler moduli
of M . Especially Fg is independent of the volume of M . This fact becomes important in
section 5.

3.2. Holomophic anomalies of correlation functions

    So far, we have studied the holomorphic anomaly of partition functions. Let us now
                                    (g)
turn to correlation functions Ci1 ···in of the chiral fields given by

                                    Z         n Z
                                              Y            3g−3 Z
                                                           Y               Z
                       (g)                           (2)               −          −
                      Ci1 ···in =         h         φir             µa G       µa G i
                                        Mg r=1             a=1

                              = Di1 · · · Din Fg .

As in the case of the partition function Fg , the derivative ∂ ī brings down the BRST trivial
                  +                                                        +                −   (g)
operator {G+ , [G , φī ]}, and the commutators of G+ and G with G− and G in Ci1 ,...,in
generate second–order derivatives with respect to (m, m) ∈ Mg and (zr , z r ) ∈ Σg where
zr (r = 1, ..., n) are the positions of the chiral fields φir . We can then apply the Cauchy
theorem to reduce the computation to a boundary integral. The boundary in this case

                                                     49
consists of two types; one is the boundary of the moduli space Mg,n of a genus–g surface
with n–punctures. Another contribution arises in a limit when one of the chiral fields φir
approaches φī .
     The computation on the boundary of the first–type is a straightforward generalization
of the one for ∂ ī Fg we did in the above. The boundary of the moduli space Mg,n consists of
                                 (0)                    (r,s)
irreducible components D(g,n) and D(g,n) each of which consists of surfaces with punctures
                              (r,s)                                                                                 (0,0)
and nodes. Here, for D(g,n) , r and s run from 0 to g and from 0 to n respectively, D(g,n)
        (0,1)                          (r,s)                                   (g−r,n−s)                            (0)
and D(g,n) are empty, and D(g,n) is identified with D(g,n)                                 . Surfaces belonging to D(g,n)
become connected surfaces of genus (g − 1) with (n + 2) punctures upon removal of the
                                                                    (r,s)
nodes (see Fig. 5). On the other hand, D(g,n) consists of surfaces which become, upon
removal of the nodes, two disconnected surfaces, one of genus r with (s + 1) punctures
and another of genus (g − r) with (n − s + 1) punctures (see Fig. 6). As in the case of the
                                                                                                        (g)
partition function Fg , contributions of these boundary components to ∂ ī Ci1 ···in come from
the region where the operator φī sits on the tube which becomes the node at the boundary
of Mg,n , and are expressed as
                      1                           (g)
                        C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Cjki1 ···in +
                      2
           1                           X  g  Xn
                                                         1       X (r)                                             (3.11)
                       2K j j̄ kk̄                                                  (g−r)
          + C īj̄ k̄ e G G                                       Cjiσ(1) ···iσ(s) Ckiσ(s+1) ···iσ(n)
           2                           r=0 s=0
                                                  s!(n   −   s)!
                                                                      σ∈Sn

where
                                (0)
                              Ci1 ···in = Di1 · · · Din−3 Cin−2 in−1 in               (n ≥ 3)
                                                        (0)              (0)
                              C (0) = 0, Ci                   = 0, Cij = 0.


                                                          ∫φi2
                                                              (2)

                                                                                            ∫φin
                                                                                              (2)
                                        ∫φi1
                                          (2)




                                                ∫φi

           Fig. 5: One of the boundary components of moduli space with fields
           inserted. The contribution again comes from the insertion of the φī on
           the tube.

                                                                    50
                                                                     ∫φi




                                (2)              (2)                           (2)           (2)
                              ∫φiσ(1)          ∫φiσ(s)                       ∫φiσ(s+1)     ∫φiσ(n)

                Fig. 6: The contribution from another component of moduli space
                where again the operator φī is inserted on the tube.

       The boundary of the second type arises since there is a singularity in the operator
product of φj (j = i1 , ..., in) and φī .

                                                                 Gj ī
                                            φj (z)φī (w) ∼                  (z → w)                 (3.12)
                                                              |z − w|2

How we regularize this divergence is a part of the definition of the theory. In the perturbed
                                                          R (2)      i R (2)
N = 2 theory given by the action S = S0 (t0 , t0 ) + δti φi + δt φī , we assume that
the original theory with the action S0 has the N = 2 superconformal invariance, which in
particular means that the theory is finite. In order to perturb the theory while maintain-
ing the superconformal symmetry, we must specify how to deal with the short distance
                               (2)            (2)
singularity between φj                and φī

                        (2)           (2)                                      4Gj ī
                       φj (z)φī (w) ≃ 4∂z ∂ z̄ φj (z)φī (w) ≃                          (z → w).    (3.13)
                                                                             |z − w|4

This divergence which arises from this short distance singularity is power in |z − w| and is
not universal. Thus we can simply subtract it away (one can renormalize the divergence
into the cosmological constant if one wishes). Once we subtract the singularity in the
operator product between φj and φī , the boundary of the second type does not contribute
          (g)
to ∂ ī Ci1 ···in .
       This is the case when the world-sheet is a flat infinite plane. When the world-sheet
is compact, there are subleading divergences in (3.12) and (3.13) which generate non-
vanishing contributions for the boundary of the second type. The subleading divergences
depend linearly on the curvature of Σ, and they can be derived from the short distance
expansion of the Green’s function on Σ. We can also understand this effect from the
topological field theoretical point of view as follows. Let us choose a metric on Σ as |ν(z)|4

                                                               51
where ν is a meromorphic 12 –differential on Σ with a pole and g–zeros at the Riemann
divisor. Since the theory is conformally invariant, we are free to use any metric we like.
In this metric, the curvature has delta-function like singularities each of which carries
R
  R = ±4π (+4π at the pole of ν and −4π at the zeros of ν(z)). When the operators
φj (z) and φī (w) are away from the support of the curvature, there is no contribution
from the boundary of the second type since the computation is the same as in the case
of the flat infinite plane. On the other hand, near the curvature singularity, we must
take into account the fact that, due to the twisting, there is an operator e±ϕ inserted
there where ϕ is the bosonized U (1) current. The operator eϕ is the chiral field of the
maximum charge (3, 3) (corresponding to the holomorphic 3–form on the Calabi-Yau 3–
fold), and e−ϕ is its conjugate anti-chiral field. Thus we can evaluate the boundary term
as in the case of the boundary of the first type discussed in the above. We then obtain
    Pn         (g)
±2 s=1 Gīis Ci1 ···is−1 is+1 ···in from each of the curvature singularities. We should also
take into account the effect of the punctures on the surface. This can be done most
easily by noting that the final result should be linear in the integral of the curvature
R
  R = −2π(2g −2+n−1) on the genus–g surface with (n−1)–punctures. The contribution
from the boundary of the second type is then
                                                      n
                                                      X               (g)
                            −(2g − 2 + n − 1)               Gīis Ci1 ···is−1 is+1 ···in .       (3.14)
                                                      s=1


      By combining (3.11) and (3.14), we obtain

            (g)        1                   (g−1)
       ∂ ī Ci1 ···in =  C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ Cjki1 ···in +
                       2 īj̄ k̄
                                   g   n
          1                       X   X        1        X (r)              (g−r)
                      2K j j̄ kk̄
         + C īj̄ k̄ e G G                               Cjiσ(1) ···iσ(s) Ckiσ(s+1) ···iσ(n) −
          2                               s!(n − s)!                                             (3.15)
                                  r=0 s=0                   σ∈Sn
                               n
                               X             (g)
         − (2g − 2 + n − 1)          Gīis Ci1 ···is−1 is+1 ···in .
                               s=1


Especially when n = 0, this equation reduces to the anomaly equation (3.6) of Fg . The
derivation of this equation is valid also for g = 0 (n ≥ 4) and g = 1 (n ≥ 2). The anomaly
equation in the case of g = 1, n = 1 is given by (3.10) and is slightly different from the
above18 .
 18
      The genus-1 one-point function may be included in the above equation if we allow the sub-
stitution (2g − 2)C (g) → (χ/24 − 1) for g → 1.

                                                         52
    To understand the structure of this equation better, let us take a look at the simplest
case of g = 0, n = 4. In this case, the equation becomes

         ∂ ī Ci1 i2 i3 i4 =C j̄ īk̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ (Cji1 i2 Cki3 i4 + Cji1 i3 Cki4 i2 + Cji1 i4 Cki2 i3 ) −
                          − Gīi1 Ci2 i3 i4 − Gīi2 Ci3 i4 i1 − Gīi3 Ci4 i1 i2 − Gīi4 Ci1 i2 i3 .

                                                            i
We can rederive this equation by computing t -derivative of Ci1 i2 i3 i4 = Di1 Ci2 i3 i4 directly
by using the holomorphicity of the Yukawa coupling ∂ ī Cijk = 0 and the special geometry
relation (3.9) for the commutator [∂ ī , Dj ]. In general, at g = 0, one can deduce the
anomaly equation (3.15) n ≥ 4 from the special geometry relation and the holomorphicity
of Cijk by mathematical induction in n. Similarly the anomaly equation (3.15) for g ≥ 1 is
a consequence of the special geometry and the holomorphic anomaly (3.6) of Fg . Thus we
come to view that that the special geometry is also one of the aspects of the holomorphic
anomaly in the topological string theory.
    Previously we found that the holomorphic anomalies of the partition functions Fg
(g ≥ 2) can be summarized in the form of the master anomaly equation (3.8). It is also
possible to combine them with the anomalies of the correlation functions (3.15) into a
single set of equations. It turns out that the equations also contain the genus-1 anomaly
equation (3.10). For this purpose, we introduce the following object.
                                   ∞ X
                                   X ∞
                                       1                                            χ       
                                                           (g)
               W (λ, x; t, t) =                   λ2g−2 Ci1 ···in xi1 · · · xin +         − 1 log λ             (3.16)
                                   g=0 n=0
                                             n!                                      24

         (g)
where Ci1 ···in = 0 for (2g − 2 + n) ≤ 0. This may be regarded as a generating function
for the correlation functions. Because of the log λ term in r.h.s., exp(W ) transforms like a
               χ
section of L( 24 −1) . Let us consider the following equation

           ∂
            i
              exp(W ) =
          ∂t                                                                                                  (3.17)
               λ2        2K j j̄ kk̄   ∂2            j  ∂     k ∂
                                                                   
          =       C e G G                    − Gīj x λ    +x          exp(W ).
               2 īj̄ k̄             ∂xj ∂xk            ∂λ     ∂xk

Substituting (3.16) into the above and expanding it in powers of λ and xi ’s, one recovers
the anomaly equation (3.15) for the correlation functions. One also finds that the genus-1
equation (3.10), which in the case of ĉ = 3 can be written as

                                         1                                χ     
                          ∂i ∂ j̄ F1 =     Cikl C j̄ k̄l̄ e2K Gkk̄ Gll̄ −     − 1 Gij̄
                                         2                                 24
                                                         53
is also contained in this equation. Here the sums over k and l are over those with (qk , qk ) =
(ql , ql ) = (1, 1).
      The equation (3.17) will prove to be crucial in section 6 when we solve the anomaly
equation (3.6) and derive explicit expressions for Fg .
      Since the anomaly equation is summarized in (3.17), one may try to solve it directly.
However we must also remember that W has the structure of (3.16) with
                                         
                            (g)              Di1 · · · Din Fg                for g ≥ 1
                           Ci1 ···in =
                                             Di1 · · · Din−3 Cin−2 in−1 in   for g = 0

and
                                     (g)
                                   Ci1 ···in = 0        for 2g − 2 + n ≤ 0.

This property of W can also be summarized in a single equation as
                                                                      
                         ∂      k j ∂              χ                ∂
                            + Γij x      + ∂i K( − 1 − λ ) exp(W ) =
                        ∂ti          ∂xk          24               ∂λ
                         "∞ ∞                                         #
                           XX 1                 (g)
                       =              λ2g−2 Di Ci1 ···in xi1 · · · xin exp(W )           (3.18)
                           g=0 n=0
                                   n!
                                                          
                            ∂              1           j k
                       =        − ∂i F1 − 2 Cijk x x exp(W ).
                           ∂xi            2λ

The two equations, (3.17) and (3.18) combined, are equivalent to all the holomorphic
anomaly equations. In Appendix B, we analyse the two equation directly to all order in g.
The order-by-order solution of the anomaly equation is presented in section 6.
      Recently Witten [27] discussed the implication of the holomorphic anomaly, which we
had previously announced in [19], to the background (in)dependence of the string theory.
There he also derived two equations, one involving ∂t̄ī and the other involving ∂ti , for some
finite dimensional quantum system associated to the Calabi-Yau manifold which resemble
the two equations, (3.17) and (3.18), derived in the above. It would be interesting to
understand the precise connection between them.




                                                          54
4. Comments on the open string version

    The topological field theories obtained by twisting N = 2 supersymmetry can also
be defined on Riemann surfaces Σ having boundaries. In order to preserve topological
invariance, one has to impose appropriate Q–invariant boundary conditions. Generally
speaking, in the open string case the methods of sects.2, and 3 are much less powerful
than in the closed one: The reason being that all our arguments rest on manipulations
involving the two scalar supercharges of the twisted theory. In the open case the boundary
                                                           +
condition is chosen so that the combination Q = G+ + G is preserved; however the other
                      +
combination G+ − G        does not leave the boundary condition invariant and hence is not
conserved any longer. Then some of the manoveurs do not extend to the open case. In
particular in the open case the curvature of the Zamolodchikov metric does not satisfy the
special geometry relation. This is related to the fact, that while closed strings compactified
on a Calabi–Yau 3–fold lead to N = 2 space–time supergravity, in the open case they lead
to N = 1. In the first case special geometry is implied by space–time supersymmetry [14],
while the only requirement from N = 1 supersymmetry is that the Zamolodchikov metric
should be Kähler.
    A particular realization of open strings satisfying the appropriate boundary condi-
tions can be described in the context of the sigma–models. The corresponding boundary
conditions, with either A– or B–twisting, were described in ref.[23]. In the A–model one
picks a Lagrangian submanifold Li ⊂ M for each component Ci of ∂Σ. Let T Li and N Li
be the tangent and normal bundles of Li in M . Then one requires that the boundary Ci
is mapped into the submanifold Li ; at the boundary the normal derivative of the bosonic
field X takes values in X ∗ (N Li ); instead χ and the pullback of ψ to Li take value in
X ∗ (T Li ). For the B–model one requires that the normal derivative of X to vanish on ∂Σ,
and that θ vanishes on the boundary as well as the pullback of ⋆ρ to ∂Σ.
    Just as the topological field theory on surfaces without boundaries defines a closed
string theory, if we allow boundaries the topological model will define an open string theory.
We can also couple to this string theory target–space gauge fields by introducing Chan–
Paton factors as usual, i.e. coupling the gauge fields to charges which propagate along
the boundary. In the B–model this results in a coupling of the open string to a rank N
holomorphic bundle E over the Calabi–Yau 3–fold M having structure group U (N ).
    Given the deep analogy between the open and closed cases, it may be appropriate to
pause a while to discuss how the results of sections 2 and 3 get modified in the open case.

                                             55
4.1. tt∗ in the open string case

     Let us start with the open analog of the tt∗ equation. We consider the following
geometry (see Fig. 7): a flat strip of width π and length L with a half–disk attached at
one end. On the boundary, except for the segment l at the opposite end, we impose the
appropriate open string boundary condition, as discussed above. On the circle arc we
insert the open string topological observable Oα .


                                                                α
                              α〉 = l

                                                  L

         Fig. 7: By inserting the topological observable Oα on the circle arc of
         the open string world sheet and doing the twisted path integral on the
         half–disk we get a state |αi at the boundary. If we take L → ∞ the
         state thus obtained is a ground state in the open string Ramond sector.


     The topological path integral in this geometry — viewed as a functional of the bound-
ary values of the fields on the segment l — defines a state in the open string Hilbert space
which we call |αi. Notice that this state is automatically in the Ramond sector. To see
this, observe that the twisting introduces an extra holonomy factor for the fermions equal
to
                                             I 
                                            i
                                      exp ±    ω ,                                      (4.1)
                                            2
where ω is the spin–connection. Given that the boundary in Fig. 7 has a geodesic deviation
of π, (4.1) gives an additional factor (−1) which transforms the N S sector into the R one.
Just as in the closed case, for each topological state |αi we can find a representative which
is an actual vacuum for the untwisted theory defined in the strip. This vacuum is obtained
simply by letting L → ∞ in the definition of |αi. If θ is the CPT operation for the
untwisted theory, |ᾱi ≡ θ|αi is also a vacuum. This allows us to introduce in the open case
a real structure matrix Mβ̄ α analogous to that for the closed case, and then a hermitian
tt∗ metric
                                      gαβ̄ = ηαγ Mβ̄ γ ,

                                             56
                         〈β α〉 =   β                         D                         α


          Fig. 8: Open string topological metric ηαβ can be defined by gluing
          the two topological path-integrals on the two half–discs with the chiral
          operators inserted at the two end boundaries.

where ηαγ is the open case topological metric, defined by the topological path integral
performed in the geometry of Fig. 8
      Going through the same argument used in the closed case, we introduce the natural
metric connection

                        Ai αβ = hβ|∂i |αi,                        Aj̄ αβ = hβ|∂ j̄ |αi.

Again topological invariance implies that Aj̄αβ = 0 and hence19

                                        (Ai )αβ = −gαγ̄ ∂i g γ̄β .

      We wish to compute the curvature of this connection. Repeating word–for–word the
closed case analysis [2], we see that the curvature can be represented by the L → ∞ limit
of the difference of the two contributions represented in Fig. 9.

                                                         L

                            β                            l                          α

                                                   [1]                 (2)
                                          ∫{Q,φj }                 ∫φi


                            β                            l                          α

                                             (2)                             [1]
                                           ∫φi                         ∫{Q,φj }

          Fig. 9: The computation of the curvature of the tt∗ metric in the path
          integral formulation involves the difference of the two path–integrals
          shown here.
 19
      Notice that this equation is consistent with the fact that the combined Zamolodchikov metric
for open and close string operators should be Kähler. As mentioned in the text, this is the only
condition on the Zamolodchikov metric which is expected for the open case.

                                                         57
      In both cases we perform the path–integral with the twisted action on a long strip
with half disks attached to the two ends on whose boundaries we insert the topological
                                                                                                          (2)
observables Oα and Oβ , respectively. In the first term the integral of φi                                         over the right
                                                                                          20           [1]
half of the ‘rounded strip’ D is also inserted while the insertion                             of {Q, φj̄ } is integrated
over the left half. In the second term the two halves interchange their role. Let us consider
the first contribution. By topological invariance, we can deform the contours such that
                 (2)
Q acts on φi , giving dφ(1) . Then the integral in the right half of D gives just the line
        R (1)
integral l φi where l is the segment separating the two halves of the figure 921 . The
                                                                      R (1)
second term can be handled in the same way. But this time we get − l φi because the
orientation is the opposite one. Then the difference is just
                                            D              Z           Z                         E
                                                                 (1)        2   [1]
                       −Rij̄αβ = Oβ (+∞)                        φi         d z φj̄ (z) Oα (−∞)                ,
                                                                                                  strip
                                                           l           D

         [1]
where φj̄ is integrated over the full ‘rounded strip’ D, and the limit L → ∞ is implied.
Then the open version of the tt∗ equations read

                                            D              Z           Z                          E
                                                                (1)            [1]
               ∂ j̄ gαγ̄ ∂i g   γ̄β              β
                                           = O (+∞)             φi         d2 z φj̄ (z) Oα (−∞)                         .   (4.2)
                                                                                                      strip
                                                           l           D                                          L→∞


      Eq.(4.2) is much less useful than its closed counterpart because it is not in the form
of a closed differential equation for the metric gαβ̄ . However, eq.(4.2) can be used to relate
the holomorphic anomaly for the open case to the tt∗ metric gαβ̄ much in the same spirit
as we did in section 3 for the closed case.


4.2. Holomorphic anomaly at one–loop

      In the open case the one–loop partition function for the topological theory coupled to
gravity is given by the following quantity
                                                       Z ∞
                                                               dL               
                                                F1 =              Tr (−1)F F e−LH ,                                         (4.3)
                                                       0        L

 20                              [1]                                                  +
      Here and below φj̄ is defined to be equal to 12 [(G+ − G ), φj̄ ].
 21
                        R    (1)
      The integral          φi         along the other components of the boundary vanishes because of the
boundary conditions.

                                                                   58
                                                         L
                                                                                 l
                                                                             π
         Fig. 10: Open one-loop partition function, is represented by a cylinder
         with perimeter L. The integration over moduli involves integration over
         L with the Fermion number current inserted on the line l

which is represented by a path integral (see Fig. 10) over a flat cylinder of length π and
perimeter L with the Fermi current integrated along a generator l.
    Taking the derivative of F1 with respect to the complex modulus ti and going through
the standard manipulations, we get
                                        Z ∞        DZ                                    Z            EL
                                                                   −                 −          (1)
                          ∂i F1 =             dL                 (G + G )                      φi                   .                    (4.4)
                                         0                                                               cylinder
                                                         l                               l′


By definition the r.h.s. of (4.4) is the one ‘point’ function
                                                   Z                   
                                                                  (1)
                                                                 φi
                                                             l              1−loop


for the (open) topological theory coupled to gravity. This quantity, being topological, is a
holomorphic function of the ti ’s except possibly for anomalies associated to failure in the
decoupling of Q–exact states. Thus ∂ j̄ ∂i F1 measures the holomorphic anomaly at one–loop
for the open case.
    Let us compute ∂ j̄ ∂i F1 . We have

            ∂ j̄ ∂i F1 =
                     Z∞ D Z         Z     Z                   EL
                              −   −   (1)             [1]
                 = dL       (G + G ) φi     d2 z {Q, φj̄ (z)}                                                             +...
                                                                                                               cylinder
                  0             l                        l′
                      Z∞        DZ                  Z                   Z                           EL
                                                               (1)                       [1]
               =−          dL           (T + T̄ )             φi             d2 z φj̄ (z)                        +...
                                                                                                      cylinder
                      0             l               l′

                                                                                                                        (1)        [1]
where . . . stands for the contribution from the contact term between φi                                                      and φj̄ . In the
next section we shall introduce much more powerful techniques to deal with such contact
terms in one–loop stringy computations. For this reason we defer the discussion of such
terms until we have developed the right tools.

                                                                   59
                                             R
    The insertion of the operator                l
                                                     (T + T̄ ) ≡ H is equivalent to taking the derivative
with respect L. Then we have
                   ∂ j̄ ∂i F1 =
                              Z∞     Z      Z
                                 d D    (1)         [1]
                                                           EL
                         = − dL        φi     d2 z φj̄ (z)           +...
                                 dL                         cylinder
                           0                l′
                        DZ      Z              E
                            (1)         [1]                                                                    (4.5)
                      =−   φi     d2 z φj̄ (z)                                         +...
                                                                      cylinder
                               l′                                                L→∞
                           Z                          "              Z                     #
                                                                           (1) [1]
                      =−            d2 z lim Tr (−1)F                     φi φj̄ (z)e−LH       + ...,
                                       L→∞
                                                                     l′
where the contact–like contribution from the boundary at L = 0 is absorbed in the dots
to be discussed in the next section.
    As L → ∞ only the vacuum contributions survive in (4.5), and the trace in the Hilbert
space can be replaced by a trace over the open string vacua. Then
    ∂ j̄ ∂i F1 =
                          *                 Z               Z                            +L
          X                                           (1)             [1]
     =−         (−1)Fα η αβ Oα (+∞)                  φi         d2 z φj̄ (z) Oβ (−∞)                    +...   (4.6)
           αβ                                l
                                                                                           strip L→∞
                   
     = tr (−1)F Rij̄ + . . . ,
where in the last step we used the open tt∗ , eq.(4.2). This is the anomaly equation we are
looking for. It can be rewritten as
                                                                 
                                     ∂i ∂ j̄ F1 − tr[(−1)F log g] = . . . ,                                    (4.7)
where . . . again denotes the short distance contributions that will be described from a more
geometrical perspective in the next section.

4.3. The holomorphic anomaly at higher loops
    At higher loops the situation with anomaly is similar to the one–loop case, although
more complicated. Consider, for instance, the case of a surface Σ with h + 1 boundaries
and genus 0 (see Fig. 11).




          Fig. 11: An open string diagram with no handles g = 0 and h = 5
          boundaries.

                                                                60
    In this case we have 3h − 6 real moduli, and Fh0 is given by
                                     Z D 3h−6
                                          Y Z                    E0
                                                           −
                             Fh0 =                µk (G− + G )        ,                  (4.8)
                                                                  h
                                           k=1
                                     M0h

where M0h is the moduli space of genus zero surfaces with h + 1 boundaries and µk are
the corresponding Beltrami differentials. Taking the derivative ∂ j̄ Fh0 inserts in the r.h.s.
                        R          [1]
of eq.(4.8) the operator d2 z {Q, φj̄ }. Integrating Q by parts we get a sum of terms in
                  R            −                              R
which Q acts on µk (G− + G ) resulting in an insertion of µk (T + T̄ ), which is then
replaced by a derivative with respect to the corresponding modulus mk .
    Then the r.h.s. of eq.(4.8) is reduced to a sum of contributions from the boundary of
the moduli space M0h . This boundary has many components. There are components like
those in Fig. 12 which corresponds to open surfaces with a smaller number of boundaries
and involving a sum over intermediate open string vacua |αi, but also components as the
one in Fig. 13 in which the degeneration of the surface involves a sum over the closed
string vacua |ii. Collecting all contributions we get the anomaly formula for the open
case which will involve the derivative of lower h, g partition function with respect to open
                                               R [1]
or closed string couplings with the operator φj̄ inserted in the lower genus amplitude
(cf. eq.(4.6)). Because of this operator insertion, in the open string case the holomorphic
anomaly is a much less powerful tool than in the closed string case, and the anomaly
equation has not the form of a recursion relation for the Fhg ’s.

                         a




                         b




         Fig. 12: The boundary of open string worldsheet may involve degenera-
         tion of the surface connected by long strips, represented here conformally
         by a black dot. The intermediate state on the long strip is an open string
         state. These contributions lead to insertion of open string vertices on
         the lower h Riemann surfaces.

                                                 61
         Fig. 13: The degeneration may also include contributions where the
         intermediate state is a closed string state.

    This additional operator insertion in the anomaly equation is problematic in the sense
that it is not topological, and hence it seems that the result of its insertion for a general
model cannot be computed by TFT methods. The tt∗ methods are somehow more powerful:
e.g. on the strip they allow to compute such a correlation in terms of the derivatives of
the metric gαβ̄ , see eq.(4.2). It is plausible that all the lower h and g correlations arising
in the computation of ∂ j̄ Fhg can be computed in a similar fashion by an extension of the
tt∗ idea to geometries other than the strip.




                                               62
5. What are the topological amplitudes computing?

    In section 2 we discussed two classes of examples of twisted N = 2 theories coupled to
gravity, the A– and the B–model and discussed what they compute at the tree level. In this
section we give an interpretation of what the topological amplitudes are computing in these
two cases after coupling to 2d gravity, i.e. the higher genus interpretation of the amplitudes
for these theories. We will first discuss the case of the B–model, where we will see that
the target space field theory interpretation of the model is related to a theory of gravity
on Calabi–Yau 3–folds which for reasons to be explained we will call the Kodaira–Spencer
theory of gravity. The tree level amplitudes in this case are related to the classical theory
of variation of Hodge structures, i.e. the special geometry that we discussed in section 2.
The one–loop amplitude of this theory is related to the holomorphic Ray–Singer torsion.
The geometric meaning of higher–loop amplitudes is less clear, though can be formally
defined and may be viewed as quantum corrections to special geometry. In the case of the
A–model, the target space field theory interpretation is far more difficult. It should be
again a theory of gravity on Calabi–Yau manifolds, but a very non-standard one, which
requires the loop space of Calabi–Yau even for the formulation of the theory. However
the interpretation of what the A–model is computing is rather simple for any genus g. In
fact the A–model, in the limit t → ∞, computes the number (or the appropriate Euler
character) of holomorphic maps from a genus g surface to the Calabi–Yau. In this sense
the A– and B– models have complementary virtues. The meaning of the computations are
more clear in the A–model but the formulation of the target space theory is very clear for
the B–model. We will use both models, in conjunction with mirror symmetry, later in the
paper to solve explicit examples at higher loops.
    In subsections 5.1-5.9 we discuss the case of B–model and KS gravity, and in subsec-
tions 5.10-5.13 we discuss the case of the A–model.


5.1. Kodaira–Spencer Theory as a String Field Theory of the B–Model

    The computations of topological B–model before coupling to gravity, can be related
to classical questions in variation of Hodge structure, i.e. the complex structure of Calabi-
Yau and how it varies. In the language of sigma models this is related to the fact that
the B–model topological theory is independent of the volume of the manifold. Rescaling
the volume to infinity implies that in the topological B–theory, not coupled to gravity,
the path–integral configurations are dominated by constant maps, thus leading to classical

                                             63
geometry questions, and in particular the questions of variation of Hodge structure of
Calabi–Yau 3-folds. As we will discuss later in the section this is essentially true (modulo
a crucial subtlety) even after we couple to 2d-gravity, where we discuss the closed string
field theory of the B–model. Before doing this we wish to discuss some mathematical
aspects of the Kodaira–Spencer theory of deformations of complex structure which turn
out to correspond to target space physics of the B–model. In other words we will argue why
the g–th loop correction for the Kodaira–Spencer theory is the same as Fg (ti , t̄i ) defined
in section 2. We will explicitly check this correspondence at genus zero and one, and also
show that in the case of genus one our anomaly coincides with the Quillen anomaly for the
Ray–Singer torsion.


5.2. Deformations of complex structure

    As it was discussed in Section (2.1) the observables in the B–model are in one to
one correspondence with cohomology elements H p (∧q TM ), where TM is the holomorphic
                                   (2)
tangent bundle. The two forms φA are possible perturbations of the Lagrangian. In case
                           (2)
p = 1, q = 1 operators φA for A ∈ H (0,1) (TM ) correspond to marginal deformations of
the B–model and are in one to correspondence with deformations of complex structure of
Calabi–Yau 3–fold M . In the spirit of string theory one expects that A ∈ Ω(0,1) (TM ) should
be the basic field in the field theory in question. This field theory is closely related to the
mathematical theory of deformations of complex structures. Before proceeding further we
first review some elements of this theory.
      The complex structure on manifold M is determined by the ∂¯ operator. To the
first order the change of complex structure is described by deformation of ∂¯ operator
∂¯ → ∂¯ + Ai ∂i [28]. This is a deformation of ∂¯ operator acting on functions. One can
describe not only the infinitesimal deformations of complex structure but a finite one. The
new complex structure is described by requiring that functions satisfying the condition

                                         (∂¯ + Ai ∂i )f = 0 ,                            (5.1)

are holomorphic in the new complex structure. In other words the kernel of the deformed
∂¯ coincides with with kernel of (5.1). The integrability condition

                         ¯ ∂f
                         ∂( ¯ + Ai ∂i f ) = (∂A
                                             ¯ j + Ai ∂i Aj )∂j f = 0

                                                 64
is equivalent to the Kodaira–Spencer (KS) equation [28]

                                       ¯ + 1 [A, A] = 0 .
                                       ∂A                                                  (5.2)
                                           2

Once again A is (1, 0) vector field with coefficients in (0, 1) forms and the brackets [ , ] mean
the commutator of two vector fields and wedging. Two solutions of (5.2) correspond to the
same complex structure if they differ by a diffeomorphism. In the linear approximation
Kodaira Spencer equation reduces to ∂A¯ = 0. The solution is defined modulo diffeomor-
                                         ¯ and thus A has to be a cohomology element.
phisms generated by vector fields A → A+ ∂ǫ,
The ambiguity in the choice of cohomology representative is promoted to the ambiguity in
the solution of Kodaira Spencer equation.
    Before fixing the ambiguity in question let us mention that for any Calabi–Yau man-
ifold there is an isomorphism

                              ′
                                  : Ω(0,p) (∧q TM ) → Ω(3−q,p) (M )                        (5.3)

given by the product with the holomorphic (3, 0) form. Sometimes we use the notation
(A · Ω) = A′ . Without lack of generality we impose the constraint

                                             ∂A′ = 0 .                                     (5.4)

                              ¯ we impose the gauge condition
To fix the ambiguity, A → A + ∂ǫ,

                                            ∂¯† A′ = 0 .                                   (5.5)

This gauge condition requires the choice of metric on the Calabi–Yau manifold. It will be
clear later that these conditions fix the solution uniquely.
    Let A, B be vector fields with the coefficients in (0, 1) forms which satisfy the gauge
condition ∂A′ = ∂B ′ = 0. It was proven by Tian [29] that

                                       [A, B]′ = ∂(A ∧ B)′ ,                               (5.6)

Later we will need the generalization of Tian’s lemma where A, B belong to Ωp (∧q TM )
[30]. Using this lemma we can rewrite the KS equation in Tian form

                                      ¯ ′ + 1 ∂(A ∧ A)′ = 0.
                                      ∂A
                                            2
                                                65
     The tangent space to the moduli space of complex structures is given by H (0,1) (TM ).
Let A1 be an infinitesimal deformation of complex structure satisfying conditions (5.5)
(5.4). Then for any A1 one can “exponentiate” the deformation of complex structure by
constructing the solution to the KS equation
                                                ∞
                                                X
                                         A=           ǫn An ,
                                                n=1


where ǫ is a formal expansion parameter (we put ǫ = 1 later). We will show that it
is possible to get a unique solution of the KS equation satisfying the gauge condition
∂¯† A′ = 0 such that A′ is ∂–exact for n > 1. Note that this latter condition automatically
                       n

implies that we can use Tian’s form of the KS equation. This choice means that A′1 is a
harmonic form, which we will call massless, and A′n for n > 1 can be written as a linear
combination of eigenstates of Laplacian with positive eigenvalue. We will call these states
the massive states.
     Let us see how we can construct the solution recursively (following the work of [29],
                                     ¯ ′ = 0 and that A′ is ∂–exact for n > 1. Let A1
[31]) making sure that at each stage ∂A     n                   n

satisfy the gauge condition (5.5) together with constraint (5.4). Thanks to Tian’s Lemma
the equation for A′2 becomes

                                   ¯ ′ + 1 ∂(A1 ∧ A1 )′ = 0.
                                   ∂A 2
                                         2

                                                                             ¯ In order to
Note that the solution to this equation for A′2 is unique up to addition of ∂ν.
get rid of this ambiguity we will consider the gauge condition ∂¯† A′ = 0. Then the solution
                                                                       2

can be written as
                                             1
                                   A′2 = −∂¯† ∂(A1 ∧ A1 )′ .                                (5.7)
                                             ∆
where
                                       ∆ = 2[∂¯∂¯† + ∂¯† ¯
                                                        ∂]

is the Laplacian. To see that the above is a solution, first note that it is well defined, because
∂ annihilates the kernel of ∆. Then acting by ∂¯ and using the fact that ∂(A      ¯ 1 ∧ A1 )′ = 0
(because A1 is ∂¯ closed and ∂¯ commutes with the operation of ′ since Ω is holomorphic)
one checks that it is a solution to the equation. It also satisfies the conditions of being
∂–exact (because ∂ and ∂¯† anticommute for a Kähler manifold) and ∂¯† closed. The fact

                                                 66
                                                                         ¯
that there is always a solution to the above equation is also known as ∂ ∂-Lemma [11]22 .
This in particular means that with the gauge condition we have chosen

                                         −1         1
                                          ¯ ∂ ≡ −∂¯† ∂                                        (5.8)
                                         2∂         ∆

and it can be viewed as a propagator for massive modes. The equation (5.7) describes
interaction between two massless modes and a massive one and then further propagation
of the massive state. It can be represented as the diagram of Fig. 14.

                                          A1              A1




                                                     A2

           Fig. 14: The first order perturbation computation for solving the KS
           equation in Tian’s gauge. Two massless modes represented by wavy
           lines join to give a massive mode whose propagator is represented by a
           solid line.

     The equation for the next iteration becomes ¯
                                                 ∂A′3 + ∂(A2 ∧ A1 )′ = 0. The second term
in this equation is ∂¯ closed ∂∂(A
                              ¯            ′                     ′
                                   2 ∧ A1 ) ∼ ∂([A1 , A1 ] ∧ A1 ) ∼ [[A1 , A1 ], A1 ] = 0 and

therefore one may use the above propagator again.

                                     1           1
                           A′3 = 2∂¯† ∂(A1 ∧ (∂¯† ∂(A1 ∧ A1 )′ )∨ )′
                                     ∆           ∆

where (A′ )∨ = A. Note that this solution satisfies the required conditions. Again this
contribution has a clear interpretation. Two massless states go to a massive one (as
before), but now the propagator receives corrections due to the coupling with the massless
state in the background. This contribution corresponds to the diagram of Fig. 15.

      It is already clear that ∂ ∂¯† /∆ is a propagator for the massive states for the field theory
in question. The massless modes play the role of the background. It is quite remarkable
that the KS equation reproduces the perturbation series of a φ3 theory.

 22         ¯
      The ∂ ∂–Lemma reads: if ω is any ∂¯ closed form and ω is also ∂ exact, then ω = ∂ ∂φ.
                                                                                        ¯

                                                67
                                         A1           A1




                                                           A1


                                                A3

           Fig. 15: Second order perturbation computation for solving the KS
           equation. Here two massless modes join to give a massive mode, emit a
           massless mode which finally gives rise to the massive mode A3 . Note that
           the only propagators involve massive modes, and the massless modes are
           like the background fields.

       At n−th iteration step all A1 , ...An−1 satisfy the conditions ∂A′1 = · · · = ∂A′n−1 = 0
and the KS equation becomes
                                           n
                                 ¯      1X
                                 ∂A′n +       ∂(An−i ∧ Ai )′ = 0                          (5.9)
                                        2 i=1

The second term of this equation is ∂¯ closed. This follows from the equations satisfied for
¯ ′ dictated by induction and the Jacobi identity for the vector fields with coefficients in
∂A i
(0, 1) forms and Tian’s lemma

                      ∂([A, B] ∧ C)′ + ∂([C, A] ∧ B)′ + ∂([B, C] ∧ A)′ = 0 .            (5.10)

It follows from the above arguments therefore that equation (5.9) has a solution and it is ∂–
exact. The perturbation theory described above is convergent in some open neighborhood
of the origin [29].
       We just proved that for any x ∈ H (0,1) (TM ) there is a map x → A[x] given by the
solution of the KS equation, with A1 = x. This choice of terminology is consistent with
the definition of xi given in section 3, and can basically be viewed as shifting the complex
structure of the Calabi-Yau labeled by (t, t̄) → (t + x, t̄). For later convenience we will
write A[x] → x + A(x). Decomposition into x and A(x) is quite natural. A cohomology
                                                P∞
element x represent a massless mode while A(x) = n=2 An contains the massive modes
of the field.
       Under the deformation of complex structure the holomorphic (3, 0) form get changed.
For infinitesimal deformation the deformed holomorphic form is equal to Ω0 + x′ . For the

                                               68
finite deformations the holomorphic (3, 0) form mixes with (2, 1), (1, 2) and (0, 3) and it
satisfies the equation
                                       ¯ + 1 ∂(Ω∨ ∧ A)′ = 0
                                       ∂Ω
                                           2
where prime and check are defined with respect to the fixed holomorphic three form Ω0 .
It follows from Tian’s lemma that the deformed holomorphic (3, 0) form is given as follows
[31]
                            Ω = Ω0 + A′ + (A ∧ A)′ + (A ∧ A ∧ A)′ .                       (5.11)

       Coordinates in H (0,1) (TM ), denoted by x, may serve as affine coordinates on some
open neighborhood of the moduli space of complex structures (see also [32]) thanks to the
Tian’s mapping. These coordinates are in fact very special (not to be confused with special
coordinates except for the particular case of base point at infinity, as discussed in section
2.6) and corresponds to the canonical coordinates discussed in full generality in section
2.6. In this coordinate the Kähler potential is given as follows
                          Z             Z               Z
                                              ′    ′
              e−K(x,x̄)
                        =    Ω0 ∧ Ω0 +      A ∧ Ā +       (A ∧ A)′ ∧ (Ā ∧ Ā)′ +
                        Z M              M               M
                                                                                          (5.12)
                          (A ∧ A ∧ A)′ ∧ (Ā ∧ Ā ∧ Ā)′ ,
                          M

where A[x] = x + A(x). Taking into account that A(x) = O(x2 ) and x and A(x) are
orthogonal to each other we get the expansion

                                                            (0)
                              e−(K(x,x̄)−K0 ) = 1 + xi x̄j Gij + O(x2 x̄2 )

It immediately follows from this expansion that in this coordinates ∂i K = 0 = Γkij vanishes
at the origin together with all holomorphic derivatives. Therefore in this coordinate the
covariant holomorphic derivatives at the origin coincides with the ordinary derivatives

                                     Di Dj ...Dk F = ∂i ∂j ...∂k F .

This property is very important and was the defining property of canonical coordinates
discussed in full generality in section 2.6. Let us clearly state that the canonical coordinates
are uniquely determined by the point in the moduli space (the origin of the coordinate
system) and the choice of the basis in H (0,1) (TM ).
       It is instructive to consider the example of canonical coordinates in the case T 2 × T 2 ×
T 2 , where T 2 is a two dimensional torus. The complex structure of each torus is described

                                                   69
by one complex parameter τi . One can carry out the construction of canonical coordinates
for each torus separately. Let us parametrize each torus using coordinates (σ1 , σ2 ), where
(σ1 , σ2 ) runs over unit square. In this parametrization ∂, ∂¯ are given as follows

                            1                                       1
                   ∂=             (τ̄ ∂1 − ∂2 ) ,        ∂¯ =             (−τ ∂1 + ∂2 )
                        (τ̄ − τ )                               (τ̄ − τ )

Now, let us choose the base point (a, ā). The holomorphic flat coordinate x around (a, ā)
                      ¯ ) = ∂(a)
is defined as follows ∂(τ   ¯ + x∂(a). It implies the relation x(τ )

                                                    τ −a
                                            x=             ,
                                                    τ − ā

i.e. the upper–half plane gets mapped into the open unit disk. The Kähler potential in
this coordinate is equal to
                                       Z Y
                          −K(x,x̄)
                        e            =    (dzi − xi dz̄i ) ∧ (dz̄i − x̄i dzi ) =
                                           i
                                                                           2              (5.13)
                      Y                           Y               ai − āi
                   =   (1 − xi x̄i )(ai − āi ) =   (τi − τ̄i ) i
                     i                            i
                                                                  τi − āi

The x dependence is quite remarkable. It is clear that all derivatives with respect to x are
proportional to x̄ and therefore identically equal to zero at the origin. The factor inside
                                                   Q
the absolute value is the gauge factor f (ai ) = −i i (ai − āi )/(τi − āi ).

5.3. Kodaira–Spencer theory as the string field theory

    So far we have discussed what seems to be a perturbative field theory which describes
the perturbation of complex structure of Calabi–Yau manifolds starting from a base–point.
Since the B–model describes the deformation of the complex structure, the effective string
field theory of the B–models must be this underlying field theory, which we shall call
the Kodaira–Spencer theory of gravity. We have two options in writing this field theory:
We can either use the Kodaira-Spencer equation in the Tian gauge to write the action
giving rise to these equations, or directly use the rules for constructing closed string field
theory along general lines discussed in the literature (see [33] for a thorough review of the
literature). We will follow the first line and see why it is the same as the second.
    To write an action we first need to fix some data: the point P (which we sometimes
denote also by (ti0 , t̄i0 )) in the moduli space of complex structures (background) and a
cohomology element x ∈ H (0,1) (TM ). The physical field A in the KS theory is a vector

                                                    70
field with coefficients in (0, 1) forms which is also constrained to satisfy condition ∂A′ = 0.
For reasons that will be clear in a moment we assume that A includes only massive modes.
                                                                                     (0,1)
This means that A lies in the subspace H ⊂ Ω(0,1) (TM ) orthogonal to H∂¯                    (TM ), or in
other words                                    Z
                                                       A′ ∧ z̄ ′ = 0
                                                   M
                    (1,0)
for any z̄ ∈ H∂             (T ∗ ). Thanks to constraint (5.4), this definition is independent of the
choice of representative in cohomologies.
         The Kodaira–Spencer action is given as follows
                             Z               Z
                           1     ′1 ¯ ′    1
             2
            λ S(A, x|P ) =     A ∂A +            ((x + A) ∧ (x + A))′ (x + A)′ ,                  (5.14)
                           2 M ∂           6 M

where λ2 is the coupling constant. In spite of the non-local kinetic term this action
                                               ¯
is well defined. Indeed, it follows from the ∂ ∂-Lemma      ¯ ′ = ∂ ∂v
                                                       that ∂A       ¯ and therefore
           ¯ + ∂ρ + z̄, where ρ and z summarize the ambiguities and z ∈ H (1,0) (T ∗ ). The
     ¯ ′ = ∂v
∂ −1 ∂A                                                                  ∂
condition that A′ is massive together with the constraint it satisfies implies that ρ and z do
not contribute to the action which therefore is well defined. Note that to define the action
we did not use the metric on Calabi–Yau manifold. We just used its complex structure23 .
This is just like the Chern–Simon theory. Thus the KS theory is a topological theory (or
more properly it could be called a holomorphic topological theory in the sense that it does
depend on the complex structure of the Calabi–Yau). Varying the KS action with respect
to A we recover the Kodaira–Spencer equation in Tian’s form

                                     ¯    1
                                     ∂A′ + ∂((x + A) ∧ (x + A))′ = 0                              (5.15)
                                          2

The existence of this action explains the fact that in the perturbation expansion for A(x)
discussed before one naturally gets Feynman rules of some field theory. In fact they are
nothing but the tree level diagrams of KS theory. Note that the propagator for KS action
    −1
∂        ∂ is given by (5.8) in the appropriate gauge.
         We now wish to see why the action (5.14) is the same as what we would have gotten
from the target space theory of the B–model. For this, we employ the arguments of Witten
[23]. He used the fact that volume perturbation for the Calabi–Yau is BRST trivial in the

    23
          To see that the action is well defined and independent of the choice of metric on M , we can
also use the ∂ constraint to write A′ = ∂φ and substitute it in the action to get a local action for
φ.

                                                         71
B–model set up, to take the infinite volume limit. In this case the worldsheet configurations
for a fixed worldsheet modulus is dominated by constant maps. But as noted in [23] this is
not the full story. The reason is that we are discussing a theory of 2d gravity which means
we are integrating over the moduli of Riemann surfaces. No matter how large a volume of
Calabi–Yau we choose if we go close enough to the boundary of the moduli space we can
get finite action. In other words the worldsheets which will have finite action are the ones
concentrated in long thin tubes, which means that we are going to end up with an ordinary
field theory as an exact field theory of string model (i.e. all the stringy massive modes are
irrelevant because of topological triviality of these modes). Indeed this argument applies
even taking into account potential anomalies, because as discussed in section 3 there is no
anomaly for the decoupling of the Kähler-moduli in the B–model.
    So to fix the string field we have to recall that the field in question should have charge
(1, 1) which in our case translates to the fact that A′ should belong to T̄M
                                                                           ∗
                                                                             ∧ TM . Let us
also recall the dictionary developed in section 2: In the large volume limit operator ∂¯ is
identified with BRST operator ∂¯ = Q = G+     +              −     −    −
                                        0 + Ḡ0 , while ∂ = G0 − Ḡ0 = b0 . The string
field A′ should satisfy two constraints

                  ∂A′ = b−  ′                                    ¯ ′=0.
                                            (L0 − L̄0 )A′ = (∆ − ∆)A
                         0 A = 0 and                                                   (5.16)

In case of the KS theory the second constraint is trivial consequence of Kählerian geometry
and amazingly the first condition is precisely Tian’s condition which led to the simplifi-
cation and proof of integrability of the KS equation in the case of Calabi–Yau 3-fold. In
order to borrow the machinery of closed string field theory we need to find an expression
for c−
     0 = c0 − c̄0 . However there is no such object just because the b-cohomology is not
trivial. What is true instead is that on the massive states of the theory, we can in fact
define a
                                                 1   ∂†
                                          c−
                                           0 =     =
                                                 ∂   ∆
which satisfies
                                          {c−    −
                                            0 , b0 } = 1

and we are thus forced to write down the action only for the massive modes. Therefore,
the kinetic piece of the KS action coincides with the free part of the standard string field
theory action                      Z
                               1         1 ′   1
                                       A′ ¯∂A = (A′ , c−   ′
                                                       0 QA )
                               2         ∂     2

                                                 72
The gauge ∂¯† A′ = 0 is nothing else but the Siegel gauge in which both b−          +   ¯†
                                                                         0 = ∂ and b0 = ∂
annihilates the physical fields. In this gauge the propagator takes the familiar form

                                          b+  −
                                           0 b0       ∂¯† ∂
                                                    =
                                        (L0 + L̄0 )     ∆
Magically enough this is identical with the Kodaira–Spencer kinetic term and the propa-
gator. The cubic interaction term is quite standard and gives rise to the interaction term
of the Kodaira–Spencer action.
      Thus the KS action is nothing else but the closed string field theory action at least
up to cubic order. One of the main difficulty of the closed string theory is the absence
of a decomposition of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces compatible with Feynman
rules. To avoid this problem one should introduce higher string vertices and as a result
the closed string field theory becomes non–polynomial (see [33] and references there). The
contribution to these higher string vertices comes entirely from the internal domains of the
moduli space of Riemann surfaces. Quantized KS theory is defined as the large volume
limit of topological sigma–model and as a topological theory it gets contribution entirely
from the boundary of moduli space of Riemann surfaces. Therefore, the higher vertices
should be absent in quantized KS theory. It is quite satisfactory that we thus end up
with precisely the KS theory as the string field theory of the B–model24 . This is further
confirmed in section 5.4 where we will find that the KS theory, with the ghost fields added,
already satisfies the BV master equation and needs no further corrections.
      Let us now discuss the gauge symmetries of Kodaira–Spencer theory. As a string
field theory we certainly expect it to have such symmetries. Being a theory of gravity
the Kodaira–Spencer theory should be invariant under diffeomorphisms (we will make this
statement precise in a moment). Put differently, the fact that the variation of ∂¯ can also
be affected by diffeomorphisms, and we do not wish to take this as a physical variation, we
need to consider the theory as a gauge theory with respect to diffeomorphism group. The
                                                                        ¯
kinetic part of the action is clearly invariant under the shift of A by ∂-exact term which
           ¯ = Qǫ. This linearized gauge transformation can be extended to a full
means δA = ∂ǫ
non linear gauge transformation which turns out to be nothing else but an Ω-preserving
diffeomorphism
                                       z i −→ z i + ǫi (z, z̄)
 24
      It is amusing to note that the closed string field theory of N = 2 strings [34] also has a
cubic action, the 4-real-dimensional action for the Plebanski equation describing Ricci–flat Kähler
metric in 2 complex dimensions, which is very similar to the KS action given above.

                                                 73
The condition that ǫ is Ω preserving diffeomorphism means that it satisfies the constraint
∂ǫ′ = 0. The full gauge transformation of the Kodaira-Spencer field A, which can be
deduced from the variation of ∂¯ under the diffeomorphism, is given as follows

                                        ¯ − [ǫ, (x + A)]
                                   δA = ∂ǫ

and using the Tian’s lemma it can be rewritten in a more familiar form δA′ = ¯
                                                                             ∂ǫ′ − ∂(ǫ ∧
(x + A))′ . One can verify that this transformation is a symmetry of the action. Indeed the
variation of the action is equal to
                         Z                          Z
                               ′¯                1                          ¯′
                2
              λ δS = −                        ′
                              A ∂((x + A) ∧ ǫ) +       ((x + A) ∧ (x + A))′ ∂ǫ
                           M                     2   M
                            Z                                                          (5.17)
                         1
                      −        ((x + A) ∧ (x + A))′ ∂((x + A) ∧ ǫ)′
                         2 M
The first two terms cancel each other as can be seen by integrating by parts. The vanishing
of the third term follows from the Jacobi identity. Indeed, the last term can be rewritten
as follows
    Z                                        Z
                               ′       ′   1
        ([(x + A), ǫ]∧(x + A)) (x + A) =        ([(x + A), (x + A)] ∧ ǫ)′ (x + A)′ =
     M                                     2  M
                        Z                                                              (5.18)
                      1
                           ([(x + A), (x + A)] ∧ (x + A))′ ǫ′ = 0
                      2 M
    To formulate the KS theory we fixed some data: point in the moduli space P and
the cohomology element x. Note that the fact that x cannot be written as part of the
kinetic term is because of the ∂ −1 in the kinetic term, which renders the appearance of x
meaningless. So the KS theory does not have the degree of freedom to shift the complex
structure as a dynamical field in the theory. Instead the existence of the coupling with x
as a background field in the interaction term is there to take care of this. One may ask how
the theory changes if we choose a different base point P . We parametrize the position of
the base point P in canonical coordinates P = P (t, t̄). Ignoring the holomorphic anomaly
the KS action depends only on t and is independent of t̄. The shift in t coordinate can
be achieved by shifting the field A by the solution of the KS equation (let A0 (x) be the
solution of KS equation). Then, consider the following identity
                                  Z                                       
         2                              ′1   ¯  ′    1                   ′
       λ S(A + A0 (x), x|t, t̄) =     A     ∂A0 + ∂(x + A0 ) ∧ (x + A0 )) +
                                   M     ∂           2
             Z                  Z
           1        1¯ ′      1
                 A′0 ∂A   0+       ((x + A0 ) ∧ (x + A0 ))′ (x + A0 )′ +               (5.19)
           2 M      ∂         6 M
               Z        h                           i 1Z
             1        ′1 ¯ ′
                    A    ∂A + ∂((x + A0 ) ∧ A) +  ′
                                                             (A ∧ A)′ A′
             2 M ∂                                     6 M

                                             74
    The first term vanishes due to the equation of motion. The second and the third
terms are naturally combined into the classical KS action evaluated on the solution of
KS equation. The two remaining terms have an interpretation as the KS action around
the new background. Indeed the combination in the square brackets coincides with the
deformed ∂¯ operator around the new background. There is still one subtlety, the prime
operation is defined with respect to old background. In the new background the prime
operation should be defined by contraction with the deformed holomorphic 3–form given
by (5.11). Noticing, that only projection on (3, 0)–forms contributes to the action one can
replace the prime operation around the old background by the prime operation around the
new background. As a result of this formal manipulation we obtain the relation

                 S(A + A0 (x), x|t, t̄) = S(A0 (x), x|t, t̄) + S(A, 0|t + x, t̄) .   (5.20)

In the original definition of the KS theory t and t̄ are complex conjugate to each other.
Without the holomorphic anomaly, the KS action is independent of t̄ and one can replace
S( |t + x, t̄) by S( |t + x, t̄ + x̄). If such arguments were true they imply the background
independence of the KS theory or background independence of the corresponding closed
string field theory. The dependence of the KS action on t̄ destroys background indepen-
dence. In other words the holomorphic anomaly governs the background dependence of the
KS action (see also discussion in [27]). In the presence of holomorphic anomaly relation
(5.19) may serve as the definition of the KS action where the condition t = t̄∗ is relaxed.
    We now come to a puzzle raised by Witten in his study of this theory [23]. It was
pointed out in [23] that the fact that three point function Cijk is not zero seems to be at
odds with the fact that there is no obstruction to deforming by the marginal operators.
The resolution of this puzzle in the context of the KS theory is simply that the massless
fields, i.e. the string modes, are not dynamical fields and so there is no reason that the
classical value of action is independent of their expectation value (as we will discuss in
more detail below). Thus the fact that the kinetic term cannot be defined unless we delete
the massless modes means in particular that Cijk may be non-zero even if the massless
modes can be given arbitrary expectation value.
    Being a quantum theory in six dimension it is not easy to explicitly compute higher
loop amplitudes in the KS theory. In particular this 6-dimensional field theory looks highly
non-renormalizable from the simple power counting argument. It is quite remarkable that

                                                75
topological string theory of the B–model provides a prescription to quantize the Kodaira-
Spencer theory. The properly regularized Kodaira-Spencer theory should satisfy
                                            Z
                              W (λ,x|t,t̄)
                            e              = DAeS(x,A|t,t̄) ,

where the effective action W (λ, x|t, t̄) was defined in section 3. We also introduce the
notation x = xi µi , where µi is some basis in H (0,1) (T ). Even though the r.h.s. of this
equation is to be properly defined at higher loop, it is well defined as it stands for the tree
level. Let us prove this relation at least at the tree level. Later in this section we will see
that it also continues to hold at one–loop.
     At the tree level, the contribution of the path-integral simply gives rise to the clas-
sical action evaluated for solutions to the field equations. Let us denote this action by
S0 (x, A0 |t, t̄) where A0 (x) is such that A0 (x) + x satisfies the KS equation (expanded
about the base point (t, t̄)). Thus we need to show

                                W0 (x|t, t̄) = λ2 S0 (x, A0 (x)|t, t̄) ,                      (5.21)

where W0 is the tree level contribution to W (i.e. the coefficient of λ−2 ). Note that in the
x-coordinate which is a canonical one, W0 of section 3 is defined by the condition
                                                   ∞
                                                   X 1       0
                       ∂i ∂j ∂k W0 = Cijk (x) =             Cijks 1 ...sn
                                                                          xs1 ...xsn
                                                   n=0
                                                       n!

and also W0 has no linear or quadratic dependence on x. We see simply from the definition
of S0 that up to O(x3 ) they are thus equal. We need to show that it holds to all orders.
Let us compare the third derivatives of both sides of (5.21). The third derivative of the
classical action is given as follows

                   d3 S0                              2                       
                            =   (δA  S)∂ i ∂ j ∂ k A  + (δA S)∂ i A + (δA ∂ i S)  ∂j ∂k A+
                dxi dxj dxk                                                                   (5.22)
       3                     2
                                                                                     
       (δA S)∂i A∂j A∂k A+3(δA   ∂i S)∂j A∂Ak + 3(δA ∂i ∂k S)∂Ak + ∂i ∂j ∂k S

where δA is variational derivative with respect to A and ∂i = ∂/∂xi and symmetrization
with respect to ijk is implicit. The first two terms vanish: the first one vanishes because
δA S = 0 by the equations of motion which is the definition of A0 (x). The second term
vanishes by taking derivative of δA S, along the classical solution, with respect to xi and
expanding to the third order term. Finally the last term can be rewritten as
                       Z
           d3 S0                                             ′
                    =     (µ i + ∂ i A 0 ) ∧ (µj + ∂ j A 0 )    ∧ (µk + ∂k A0 )′ = Cijk (x)
        dxi dxj dxk

                                                  76
where the last equality follows from the alternative definition of Yukawa coupling discussed
in section 2 (see (2.36)). This proves the equation (5.21).
     W0 (x|t, t̄) may be viewed as the effective action for the massless modes x having
integrated out the massive modes. It is quite amazing that integrating the massive modes
has only the effect of taking derivatives of the Yukawa coupling. For example (see Fig. 16)
the four point function gives rise to ∂l Cijk , the five point function to ∂s ∂l Cijk and the six
point function to ∂r ∂s ∂l Cijk .

                                         i                                k
                       a

                           ∂l Cijk =                                          + perm.

                                         j                                l

                                                          k
                                         i                                l
                       b

                           ∂l ∂sCijk =                                        + perm.

                                         j                                s

                                                     i        j

                       c

                             ∂r∂l ∂sCijk =                                +…
                                             k                        r

                                                 l                s
          Fig. 16: Tree level computations in the KS theory as a function of the
          background fields (the wavy lines which represent the massless modes).
          As argued in the text the n–point functions at the tree level can also be
          computed by taking appropriate number of derivatives of the Yukawa
          coupling. Here the four point function (a), five point function (b), and
          six point function (c), are represented and can be most easily computed
          by taking the first, second and third derivative of Yukawa couplings
          respectively.

     In fact we will now use this fact to estimate the behavior of the partition function at
genus g of the KS theory to all loops, as we approach the boundary of moduli space. This

                                                     77
will be needed in conjunction with the anomaly equation to constrain the global properties
of the partition function of the topological string theory and will be heavily used in the
context of solving explicit examples.
    This is done by estimating the leading divergence of each diagram as we approach
the boundary of moduli space. To do this we need the estimate of the propagator and
the three point interaction of the massive modes (the massless modes do not propagate in
loops). Let us denote the leading divergence of the propagator by P , of the massive vertex
by VM M M , and of the vertex with two massless and one massive mode as VttM . Using the
topology of φ3 graphs at g loops we estimate the Kodaira–Spencer partition function Fg
to behave as
                                 Fg ∼ P 3g−3 (VM M M )2g−2                             (5.23)

We want to express this in terms of Cttt , the leading divergence in the Yukawa coupling
for the massless modes written in the canonical coordinate t. The n–point functions at tree
level, are given by ∂tn Cttt . Using the tree–level KS perturbation theory, we learn that the
four point function of the massless modes behaves as

                                     ∂t Cttt ∼ P (VttM )2 ,

while the six point function goes like

                                ∂t3 Cttt ∼ P 3 (VttM )3 VM M M .

Eliminating VttM from these two equations and using (5.23) we learn that

                                            [∂t3 Cttt ]2g−2
                                     Fg ∼                   .                          (5.24)
                                            [∂t Cttt ]3g−3

Note that the estimate (5.24) is independent of the definition of the canonical coordinate
t or the gauge for the line bundle L as it should be.

5.4. BV formalism and closed string field theory

    In this section we quantize the KS action using the BV formalism which is particularly
well suited to string theory. The interpretation of the KS theory as string field theory turns
out to be very useful. In this interpretation the KS field A′ is identified with the string
field. But in string theory there are ‘ghost’ states, which mean that we are not restricted
to ghost number (1, 1). Translated to the geometry of Calabi-Yau, this means that we

                                               78
should broaden the range of A so that A ∈ Ω(0,p) (∧q TM ); the ghost counting coincides
with the fermion counting and is equal to FL + FR = (p + q − 3). The original KS field A′
has the ghost number 2.
    The consistent scheme for quantization string field theory is given by Batalin–
Vilkovisky (BV) formalism [35][36]. In the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism one has to relax
the condition for the ghost numbers of string field and include all possible fields with ar-
bitrary ghost numbers. The fields A with ghost numbers q(A) ≤ 2 are called fields, while
the fields A∗ with ghost numbers q(A) > 2 are called antifields. The space of function-
als of fields-antifields is equipped with odd antibracket { , }. The BRST symmetry is a
canonical transformation in the antibracket. The BRST variations of the fields are given
as follows
                                      δBRST A = {A, S}

The original action is replaced by full action which depends on both fields and antifields.
The full action satisfies two conditions. When all antifields are set to zero the full action
reduces to the original one. The full action also satisfies Batalin-Vilkovisky master equation

                                        {S, S} = h̄∆S ,                                   (5.25)

where ∆ is the natural Laplacian on the space of fields-antifields. The r.h.s. of (5.25)
is contribution coming from the path integral measure. At the classical level (h̄ = 0)
the Batalin-Vilkovisky equation is nothing else but the condition that full action is gauge
invariant. The gauged fixed action is determined by an odd functional Ψ(A) and is given
by SΨ (A) = S(A, A∗ = δΨ/δA).
    In the case of the KS theory the full space of fields is a subspace H of ⊕p,q Ω(0,p) (∧q TM )
satisfying the constraints (5.16). The space

                                    ⊕p+q≤2 Ω(0,p) (∧q TM )

is the space of fields, while
                                    ⊕p+q>2 Ω(0,p) (∧q TM )

is the space of antifields. Note that not all (p, q) are allowed, and the projection of H
on ⊕Ω(0,p) (∧3 TM ) is empty. Taking into account that both fields and antifields satisfy
constraints (5.16) we get exactly the same number of fields and antifields. Fields and
antifields are paired with each other

                     A ∈ Ω(0,p) (∧q TM ) ←→ A∗ ∈ Ω(0,3−p) (∧(2−q) TM ) .

                                               79
and obey opposite statistics. The odd bracket structure on the space of field-antifields is
given by
                       {Aqp (z), Aq̃∗
                                  p̃ (w)} = δp+p̃,3 δq+q̃,2 Ω
                                                              −1
                                                                 ∂δ(z, w)Ω̄ ,

where δ(z, w) is the delta function on the Calabi–Yau manifold, defined as follows
                                  Z
                                          δ(x, y)Ω(x) ∧ Ω̄(x) = 1
                                      M

This structure is promoted to a canonical antibracket on the space of functionals and
formally may be written as follows

                             XZ                       ∨                                    ∨ !∨
                                                  δF         δL    δF                   δL
                  {F, L} =                ∂                    ∗
                                                                 −     ∂                              .
                                                  δA        δA     δA∗                  δA

It is quite remarkable that the full KS action is given by the same expression as the original
KS action, but without any restrictions on the ghost numbers. Indeed, the ghost number
conservation requires that either all fields in the action are elements of Ω(0,1) (TM ), or at
least one field has ghost number greater than 2 and therefore this field is an antifield.
When all antifields are put to zero the only contribution to the action comes from the
original field A ∈ Ω(0,1) (TM ). It is a tedious but straightforward check that the full action
is invariant under the nonlinear gauge transformation. The proof is based on generalized
Tian’s Lemma (5.6) for arbitrary (p, q) forms and the generalized Jacobi identity (5.10).
    The naive definition of the Laplacian turns out to be the correct one:

                                          Z                            ∨ !∨
                                                       δ           δ
                                 ∆=                       ∂                     .
                                                      δA∗         δA

To verify that this definition is indeed covariant one has to take into account that
δAqp (x)/δAsr (y) = δp,r δq,s δ(x, y)Ω ∧ Ω̄. Now we can check whether the full Kodaira Spencer
action S(A, A∗ ) satisfies the master equation (5.25). The gauge invariance of the full ac-
tion implies that l.h.s of (5.25) is equal to zero. The r.h.s can be easily computed and it is
equal                                             Z
                                   ∆S ∼               ∂(ΩA10 ) ∧ Ω̄ = 0

Indeed, ∂(ΩA10 ) = ∂(A10 )′ = 0 due to constraint (5.16). The above discussion implies that
quantum corrections are not needed for maintaining the gauge invariance of the KS theory.

                                                        80
5.5. Open string field theory

    In the case of the open string, the resulting string field theories were studied in detail
by [23]. There it is shown that the space–time physics of the A–model, defined on the
non–compact Calabi–Yau 3–fold T ∗ L (where L is any real 3–fold), is equivalent to the
usual Chern–Simons field theory on the real three–manifold L. Instead the B–model is
classically equivalent to the following field theory on the original Calabi–Yau manifold M
                                Z                                 
                              1                       2
                         S = 2 Ω ∧ Tr B ∧ ∂B + B ∧ B ∧ B ,                           (5.26)
                                                      3
                                M

where the field B is a one–form on M of type (0, 1) taking values in End(E) and Ω is
the holomorphic (3, 0) form. The classical solutions of (5.26) are the possible inequivalent
holomorphic structures we can put on the bundle E. We thus see the space–time interpre-
tation of the closed B–model string, i.e. the Kodaira–Spencer theory is very reminiscent
of (5.26); in particular, the classical solutions will correspond to the possible inequivalent
holomorphic structures we can put on the manifold M itself. To make this analogy even
more striking it turns out that the KS action itself may be viewed as a CS action where the
gauge group of the open string is replaced by an infinite dimensional group of Ω–preserving
diffeomorphisms of the 3–fold. This point we will now explain.
    Let us consider a 6–real–dimensional symplectic manifold M which consists of a 3-
dimensional base space X and a 3-dimensional internal space Y . This symplectic manifold
may be regarded as an “analytic continuation” of a Calabi-Yau manifold, where we relate
the complex coordinates (z, z) of the Calabi-Yau to a pair of real coordinates (x, y) of
M (x ∈ X, y ∈ Y ). The Kähler structure on the Calabi-Yau is inherited on M as the
symplectic structure, the holomorphic and the anti-holomorphic 3-forms on the Calabi-
Yau become the volume forms on the base X and on the fiber Y . There is also analog
of the ′ -operation on M which is realized by a multiplication by the volume form on the
fiber. Consider the Lie algebra L of the volume preserving vector fields (satisfying condition
dy A′ = 0) along the fiber with coefficients in 1-forms on the base. We also assume that
the space of L′ is orthogonal to H1 on M . An invariant Killing form for this Lie algebra
is given as follows                           Z
                                                            1 ′
                                    T rAB =        d3 yA′      B
                                              Y             dy
In this notations it is easy to see that KS action coincides with CS action for L
                                 Z                      Z
                  2            1      3               1
                λ S(A, 0) =          d xT rA ∧ dx A +      d3 xT rA ∧ A ∧ A
                               2 X                    3 X

                                                  81
5.6. Kodaira-Spencer theory at one–loop

      In this section we will discuss the computation of Kodaira-Spencer theory partition
function at one–loop. In order to do this, and in view of more general applications, we will
first discuss the holomorphic Ray-Singer Torsion.

5.7. Holomorphic Ray-Singer torsion

      Consider a Kähler manifold M with a holomorphic vector bundle V on it equipped
with a norm and a connection compatible with it. Let ∂ V denote the del-bar operator
coupled with the vector bundle acting 25

                                               ∗                  ∗
                            ∂V :       ∧p T ⊗ V → ∧p+1 T ⊗ V

where p runs from 0 to dim(M ) − 1. Let ∆V = ∆1 + ∆2 denote the corresponding
                              †                     †                                          (p)
Laplacian where ∆1 = ∂ V ∂ V and ∆2 = ∂ V ∂ V . Let us consider the spectrum of ∆V
acting on ∧p T̄ ∗ ⊗ V . By Hodge decomposition we can find the non-zero spectrum of the
                                             (p)        (p)                              (p)
Laplacian by finding the spectra of ∆1             and ∆2 . Note that the spectra of ∆1        and
  (p−1)                                       (p)     (p+1)
∆2       are the same, as are the spectra of ∆2 and ∆1      . Let us denote the spectrum
     (p)
of ∆2 by {λp,p+1 }. In constructing a determinant of the Laplacian acting on forms of all
degree it is natural to consider an alternating product of spectra raised to the power of
±1 depending on the parity of the form, deleting the zero modes. However this will just
                                                                           (p)
give the net answer 1, because the spectra of Laplacian coming from ∆1           will cancel with
          (p−1)                 (p)                          (p+1)
those of ∆2     and those from ∆2 will cancel with those of ∆1     . To avoid this trivial
cancellation we can consider instead
                                       n−1
                                       Y                      p
                                             {λp,p+1 }−(−1)
                                       p=0


This can also be written, taking into account the Hodge decomposition, as
                                             Y       (p)    p
                                   I(V ) =    (det′ ∆V )(−1) p                            (5.27)

where ′ denotes deleting the zero modes. The appropriately regularized I(V ) is known as
the holomorphic Ray-Singer torsion for this vector bundle [37]. The main theorem in [37]

 25
      We are abusing the notation of denoting the section of the bundle and the bundle both by
V.

                                                   82
asserts that I(V1 )/I(V2 ) is independent of the choice of Kähler metric on M though it does
depend on the choice of complex structure on M (the case considered in [37] is when there
                                                                        Q       (p)    p
are no zero modes). Morally speaking we should think of I(V ) as the (det′ ∂ V )(−1) .
Note that formally one may write
                                         Z ∞
                                               ds ′
                           logI(V ) =             Tr (−1)p p exp(−sH)                 (5.28)
                                         ǫ      s
where the Tr′ is over all degree forms in the positive eigenspace of H where H = ∆V . This
integral is regularized by taking s to run from ǫ > 0 to ∞.
    The main technique to compute the Ray-Singer holomorphic torsion has been recently
developed in connection with Quillen’s holomorphic anomaly [38]. Consider a family of
complex structures on M parametrized by a complex parameter t. Let us assume that
there are no jumps in the zero modes of ∂ V . Choose a holomorphic basis for the zero
modes of ∂ V and let dp = log(detg (p) ) denote the determinant of the inner product in the
subspace of ∧p T ∗ ⊗ V of the kernel of ∂ V . Then it turns out that using Quillen anomaly
in this context one can show [38]
                                     X                   Z
                                               p
                 ∂∂[logI(V )] = ∂∂       (−1) dp + 2πi        Td(T )Ch(V )            (5.29)
                                     p                    M
                                                                             (1,1)

where T is the tangent bundle of M viewed as a bundle over M times the complex moduli
space, Td denotes the Todd class
                                                                
                                                R/2πi
                              Td[T ] = det
                                           1 − exp(−R/2πi)
where R is the curvature form for the tangent bundle, and Ch(V ) = tr exp(F/2πi) denotes
the Chern class of the vector bundle V , viewed as a bundle over M times the complex
moduli space where F is the curvature of V . The symbol |(1,1) in the above formula means
that we take the (n + 1, n + 1) form of the integrand and integrate over M to be left with
a (1, 1) form on the complex moduli. The basic idea behind (5.29) is that, if we ignore
the zero modes that are present, if we integrate both sides over 1 dimensional complex
moduli, the left–hand side (l.h.s) gives 2πi times the total number of zero modes of ∂
(weighted with ± sign) and r.h.s. is the family’s index for the ∂ V operator, and thus
counts precisely the same as the l.h.s.. The main non-trivial content of (5.29) is that it is
true even before integration over moduli space (this can also be argued using the integrated
version by taking various interesting limits). The terms corresponding to the determinant
of the norm of the zero modes in (5.29) is also familiar from the Quillen anomaly and
come about because we are dealing with the determinant of Laplacian with the zero modes
deleted (see e.g. [39]).

                                                   83
5.8. KS theory at one–loop and RS torsion

    Having developed the notion of the RS torsion, we are now ready to compute the
partition function of the KS theory at one–loop. In fact we will be more general as the
computation can be carried out in the B–model version of any Calabi-Yau n–fold and not
just the 3–fold. From the formula for F1 given by (2.37) it is possible to extract the large
volume behaviour, in which case FL and FR as noted in section 2 are given by

                                                1
                                   FL,R =         (i(k − k † ) ± (p − q))
                                                2

inserting FL FR in the trace, and using the sl(2) invariance of Kähler manifolds we can
replace −(k − k † )2 in the trace with (p + q − n)2 , and noting that insertions of p2 or q 2
alone in the trace are independent of the moduli (as they would be index computations)
leads us to the statement that the insertion of FL FR is equivalent (as far as the moduli
dependence is concerned) with insertion of p · q. Now using the form of F1 and comparison
with (5.28) leads us to
                                            1X
                                   F1 =         (−1)q q log I(∧q T ∗ )
                                            2 q

Now, according to [19] we have a formula for ∂∂ anomaly of F1 . On the other hand, using
the Quillen anomaly discussed above for I(V ), we can compute the anomaly in another
way. The fact that the two are the same is a very interesting check on these ideas, and in
particular is the ‘mirror’ version of the conformal theory statement of the anomaly. There
were two terms in the anomaly discussed in [19], as there are two terms for the anomaly
(5.29). The first term in each of these two is the same, and simply is the contribution of the
volume of zero modes to the anomaly. The more subtle term is the second one which comes
from the contact terms both in string theory and in the computation of Quillen anomaly.
As shown in [19] the second term there is χ(M ) · G/24 where G is the Kähler form for the
Zamolodchikov metric on moduli space. Therefore we wish to prove the following equation

                     Z            n
                                  X                                              1
               2πi       Td(T )         (−1)p p Ch(∧n−p T ∗ )                =      χ(M ) G   (5.30)
                     M            p=0
                                                                                 12
                                                                (1,1)−part


    We start by recalling a few facts [40]. First of all,
                                          n
                                          X
                              Td(T )            (−1)p Ch(∧p T ∗ ) = cn (T )
                                          p=0


                                                      84
(T ∗ is the cotangent bundle). This is (a special case of) theorem 10.1.1 in [40]. Now we
apply the Hirzebruch argument to our case. Let γi be the eigenvalues of the curvature
form. Consider the identity (notation as in the proof of th.10.1.1)

                                 n
                                 X                               n
                                                                 Y
                                       (−1)r xr Ch(∧r ξ) =              (1 − xe−γi ).                 (5.31)
                                 r=0                             i=1


One has
                         Xn                         n
                                                ∂ X
                             (−1)p p Ch(∧p ξ) =        (−1)r xr Ch(∧r ξ)     .
                         p=0
                                                ∂x r=0                   x=1


Using the identity (5.31), the r.h.s. becomes

                                       Y              XY
                                  n     (1 − e−γj ) −    (1 − e−γi ).
                                        j                    j   i6=j


Imitating the proof of the quoted theorem, we consider (ξ 7→ T ∗ )

                      n
                      X                                   X                               Y
                                                                                    γj
               Td(T )   (−1)p p Ch(∧r T ∗ ) = n cn (T ) −                                   γk .      (5.32)
                           p=0                                               j
                                                                                 1 − e−γj
                                                                                         k6=j


Now,
                                     γj                   1
                                       −γ
                                            = 1 + 21 γj + γj2 + . . . ,
                                   1−e    j              12

where . . . means higher degree. Inserting this expansion in (5.32) we get

                   n
                   X                               n                       1
          Td(T )         (−1)p p Ch(∧p T ∗ ) =       cn (T ) − cn−1 (T ) − cn (T )c1 (T ) + . . . .
                   p=0
                                                   2                      12


We have to take the (n + 1, n + 1) component of the r.h.s. which is

                                                   1
                                              −      cn (T ) c1 (T ).
                                                  12

Now using the fact that by the discussion in section 2, c1 (T ) = −c1 (T ∗ ) = −G/2πi, and
             R
the fact that cn (T ) = χ(M ) we get (5.30) which is what we wished to show.

                                                        85
5.9. One–loop topological open string amplitudes

    If we consider the open string version of the N = 2 twisted model coupled to gravity,
as mentioned before, it turns out that the space of vacua are related to a choice of a
holomorphic vector bundle V over M [23]. In such a case taking the large volume limit in
the B-version of the model would lead us to (5.28). Thus the one-loop partition function
of open string is exactly the holomorphic Ray-Singer torsion, F1 = I(V ), and is thus
computable again using the Quillen anomaly (5.29).
    Note in particular the computation in section 4 at one–loop amplitude of open string
gives the same answer as the first term in the Quillen anomaly for Ray-Singer torsion. The
contact terms were not considered in section 4, but since they can be computed in this
field theory setup, they must be the same as the ones leading to the index integral.


5.10. The geometrical information encoded in Fg for the A–model

    In this subsection we describe the geometrical information encoded in Fg for the A–
model defined on a Calabi–Yau 3–fold M . As discussed in section 2.2. the A–model action
reads                        Z                                          Z
                X                                        X
           S=        t   i                α¯
                                 (ωi )αβ̄ ∂X ∂ X̄ + β̄
                                                               t̄   i                        ¯ α + fermions,
                                                                            (ωi )αβ̄ ∂ X̄ β̄ ∂X
                 i                                        i

where the integral forms ωi span H 1,1 (M ). As we know from the discussion in section 3,
Fg is not a holomorphic section of L2−2g , and therefore Fg depends on a choice of a base
point t̄i in the moduli space H 1,1 (M, C). The meaning of Fg is particularly transparent
if we choose the base point to be at infinity i.e. to correspond to positive infinite volume.
                               P
Then we set t̄i = t̄ mi , where i mi ωi is a positive Kähler form ω, and then send t̄ → +∞.
Of course, in this process the ti ’s are still kept arbitrary. Since in the weak coupling (=
infinite volume) limit the A–model correlations reduce to classical geometric objects, this
is the choice of base point for which the geometric nature of Fg is more evident.
    Indeed, as t̄ → +∞ the action becomes
                                                Z
                                       S = t̄       ωαβ̄ ∂ X̄ β̄ ¯
                                                                ∂X α + . . . .                                 (5.33)

                                              ¯ α = 0, i.e. correspond to holomorphic maps
Then all finite action configurations satisfy ∂X
from the Riemann surface Σg to the Calai–Yau space M . Thus the g–loop amplitudes for

                                                          86
the A–model with base point at infinity are exactly given by sums over holomorphic maps
X from genus g surfaces to the Calabi–Yau space M of the form

                                    a
                                    X
                             Fg =        Nng1 n2 ...nh q1n1 q2n2 · · · qhnh ,
                                     n

                                                           R
where, as in section 2, qk = exp[−tk ] and nk =                X ∗ ωk . The coefficients Nng1 n2 ...nh are
related to the ‘number’ of maps in the given topological class as we will discuss below.
This means that we can use the A–model partition functions to ‘count’ the number of
such maps, or equivalently the number of genus g holomorphic curves lying on M . This
counting was done for the special cases g = 0 and g = 1 in Ref. [7] and [19], respectively.
    In general, given a Riemann surface Σg the existence of holomorphic map of a given
degree into M depends on the complex structure of M . Because of the absence of mixed
anomalies (section 3), Fg is independent of the complex structure of M . Then in order to
get the number of curves from the A–model it is crucial that we integrate over the complex
moduli of Σg , i.e. that the A–model is coupled to topological gravity. Then the ‘number’
of holomorphic maps Σg → M summed over the moduli space of Mg is independent of
the complex structure of M .
    In order to extract from Fg the number of maps of a given type, we need to know for
each kind of map (including multi–covers and singular ones) how the coefficient Nng1 n2 ...nh
in the q–expansion of Fg is related to the actual number of holomorphic curves. This
requires doing an explicit path–integral around an instanton of the given type. The rest
of this section and appendix A are dedicated to such path–integral computations. In fact,
this section is rather technical. We will limit ourselves to smooth manifold M and not
deal with spaces such as orbifolds, though many of the techniques we discuss can be easily
adapted to such cases. The limit t̄ → ∞ is implicit throughout.
                                        R
    We recall that Fg is given by Fg = Mg Zg , where Zg is the following top form over
Mg (for g ≥ 2)

   (3g − 3)! (2πi)3g−3 Zg =
                         *                                                        +
                                Z            ^       Z                   3g−3                 (5.34)
                       =    dma    µa ψα ∂X α    dm̄b̄    µ̄b̄ ψ̄β̄ ∂¯X̄ β̄          ,
                                                                                             g


                                                  87
and ma are coordinates on Mg associated to the Beltrami differentials µa .


5.11. Contribution to Fg from an isolated genus g curve


      If Fg has to ‘count’ the number of genus g curves lying on the Calai–Yau manifold M ,
in particular it should be true that the contribution to Fg from an isolated such curve Cg
is given by                                "                     #
                                                 X         Z
                                         exp −        ti        ωi ,                       (5.35)
                                                 i         Cg

with coefficient 1. Here we check explicitly this property of Fg . The assumption of Cg
being isolated is rather unrealistic; for g > 1 the holomorphic curves typically belong to
multi–parameter families. Below we shall drop this assumption.
      Let Tg be the Teichmüller space of genus g curves. Clearly counting holomorphic maps
Σg (m) → Cg for m ∈ Mg is equivalent to counting holomorphic maps homotopic to the
identity but with m ∈ Tg . We shall take this second viewpoint26 . We take as base point in
Tg the point corresponding to the complex structure of Cg (for some choice of marking);
hence for ma = 0 we have a holomorphic map Σg (0) → Cg ⊂ M homotopic to the identity.
By the general argument around eq.(5.33) the contribution from Cg to Fg has support at
ma = 0, so in the following we take ma to be very small.
      Our action can be rewritten as
                           Z                               Z
             S = 2 (t + t̄) d z ωαβ̄ ∂µ X ∂ X̄ + 2 (t − t̄) X ∗ ω + fermions,
                  1          2           α µ β̄  1
                                                                                           (5.36)

where ω is the Kähler form of M . We are interested in the limit t̄ → +∞ at t fixed. The
second term in the r.h.s. of (5.36) is independent of the smooth map X, as long as its
image is in the homology class of Cg . Hence the minimum of the action in this topological
class is obtained by minimizing the first term i.e. by the corresponding harmonic map.
Here we are interested only in ma small. In this case the harmonic map has the form
X(z)α + δX α , where X(z)α is the map Σg (0) → Cg . We can decompose the variation δX α
into a component perpendicular to Cg and one along Cg . The component perpendicular is

 26
      It is also convenient (although not necessary) to modify the metric ωαβ̄ in a tubular neigh-
borhood of Cg such that the induced metric on Cg has constant curvature. We are free to do this,
since a deformation of the metric preserving the Kähler class is a D–term perturbation which does
not affect any topological quantities.

                                                     88
an element of H 0 (Σg (0), TM ) and hence vanishes by the rigidity assumption. Then, to the
first order, our harmonic map can still be seen as map X: Σg (m) → Cg . It is a theorem
by Shoen and Yau [41] that there exists a unique harmonic map Σg (m) → Cg (homotopic
to the identity). Neglecting higher orders in ma , the value of the action at the extrema is
then
                                 Smin = 12 (t + t̄)E(ma , m̄b ) + 12 (t − t̄)d,
                          R
where E(ma , m̄b ) =          d2 z gij̄ ∂µ X i ∂ µ X̄ j is the Shoen–Yau “energy” as a function of the
moduli and                                 Z                       Z
                                                 ∗  1X i
                                      d=       X ω=     t                ωi ,
                                                    t i             Cg

is the ‘degree’ of Cg .
       Of course, one has
                                               E(ma , m̄b ) ≥ d,

with equality if and only if the corresponding harmonic map is holomorphic, which happens
only for ma = 0. The function E(ma , m̄b ) is the Kähler potential for the ‘Weil–Petersson’
(WP) metric Wab̄ at the base point, i.e. [42]

                                            ∂a ∂¯b E         = Wab̄ .
                                                       m=0


More precisely, Wab̄ is the usual Weil–Petersson metric if we have chosen the metric on M
so that the induced metric on Cg has constant curvature (see previous footnote). Otherwise,
Wab̄ is some metric on Tg ; our computations below are valid for any choice of the metric.
       Consider the Shoen–Yau solution X(z, z̄). By definition, this smooth function is holo-
morphic with respect the complex structure defined by Cg . Then, applying the Kodaira–
Spencer machinery to the variation of the complex structure of the Riemann surface, we
see that
                                               ¯ − Φ ∂X = 0,
                                               ∂X                                              (5.37)

where Φ is the KS vector defining the complex structure of Cg in terms of that of Σg (m).
       Now, let us consider the derivative ∂ma X of X at m = 0. If µa is the Beltrami
differential corresponding to an infinitesimal variation of the moduli δma , one has ∂ma Φ =
µa . Then, taking the derivative of (5.37), we get

                      ∂ma ∂z̄ X           = µa ∂z X          +Φ          ∂ma ∂X = µa ,
                                    m=0                m=0         m=0

                                                       89
where we used the fact that at m = 0 the Shoen–Yau map is the identity, i.e. X(z)|m=0 = z,
and Φ|m=0 = 0. The same argument give ∂¯m̄a ∂X¯ = 0.
       Then27
                                         Z
                   ∂a ∂¯b̄ E         =       ωαβ̄ ∂ma ¯
                                                     ∂X α ∧ ∂¯m̄b ∂ X̄ β̄         = (µb , µa ),
                               m=0       Σ                                  m=0

where (·, ·) is the Hodge inner product on K̄ ⊗ K −1 with respect to the metric γzz̄ on Σg
induced by the imbedding in M i.e. γzz̄ = ωαβ̄ ∂z X α ∂z̄ X̄ ∂β . If we choose this metric to
be constant curvature, this inner product is (by definition) the Weil–Petersson metric on
Mg .
       As t̄ → ∞, the contribution of Fg from the curve Cg is concentrated at the point
m = 0 in moduli space. Hence we can assume m to be small. In this case, one has
                                                             
                     e−Sbos   ≈ e−t d exp − 21 t̄ Wab̄ ma m̄b
                        t̄→∞                                    t̄→∞
                                 3g−3
                                  2π                   −1 −d t
                              =              det Wab̄      e      δ(ma )δ(m̄b )    (5.38)
                                   t̄
                                 3g−3
                                  2π
                              =             e−d t δW (m).
                                   t̄
                                                                          R
where δW (m) is covariant δ–function for the WP metric, i.e. such that dµW P f (m)δW (m−
a) = f (a) where dµW P is the WP volume form.
       From (5.38) we see that only the identity map contributes to the integral. In the
pre–exponential factor in (5.34) we can replace X α (z) by this identity map.
       Let i: Cg → M be the imbedding map and ηA α (A = 1, . . . , 3(g − 1)) be a basis28 of
H 0 (Cg , K ⊗ i∗ T ∗ ) orthonormal in the sense that
                                    Z
                                       ω αβ̄ η̄B̄ β̄ ∧ ηA α = δAB̄ .
                                             Σ

Let µa be the Beltrami’s corresponding to the moduli ma , chosen to be harmonic with
respect to the metric γzz̄ . Then consider the quantity

                                                  ωαβ̄ µ̄ā ∂¯X̄ β̄ dz

 27
       There are two terms in the definition of E(m, m̄). However, since their difference is just the
topological invariant d, for computing the variation of E(m, m̄) we can replace their sum by twice
the first term.
 28
       In fact, since the map X: Σg (0) → Cg is the identity, ηA are just the ordinary quadratic
differentials on Σg .

                                                          90
it belongs to H 0 (Cg , K ⊗ i∗ T ∗ ) and hence has an expansion in terms of the ηA basis of the
form B̄āA ηA for some coefficients BāA .
      Let us expand ψ(z) as29
                                                                 √
                                                   ψ(z) =             t̄ ψ A ηA (z).

Then                        Z                                                      Z                                  
                                                           √
                        a                      α
                   dm            µa ψα ∂X              =       t̄ ψ   B
                                                                          dm BaĀ
                                                                             a
                                                                                                  ω β̄α η̄Ā β̄ ∧ ηB α
                                                           √
                                                       =       t̄ dma BaĀ ψ B δĀB .
Then the expression
                           Z                     ^                Z                           3g−3
                     dm a
                                 µa ψα ∂X      α
                                                           dm̄  b̄
                                                                            µ̄b̄ ψ̄β̄ ∂¯X̄   β̄

                                                                                                            zero−modes

after the integration over the ψ zero–modes becomes
                                                           Y
                (3g − 3)! |t̄|3g−3 | det[B]|2                   dma dm̄b̄ = (3g − 3)!|t̄|3g−3 dµW P .                        (5.39)

Here the last equality follows since | det[B]|2 is nothing else than det[W ], where W is the
WP metric. Indeed,
                                           Z
                            (µa , µb ) =   ω αγ̄ (ωαβ̄ µ̄ā ∂¯X̄ β̄ )(gγ̄δ µb ∂X δ )
                                                  Z
                                         A B̄
                                     = B̄ā Bb      ω γ̄α ηA α ∧ η̄B̄ γ̄ = (B̄B t )āb .

      Finally from (5.34), (5.38), and (5.39), we get

                                   Zg                            = e−d t δW (m)dµW P                                         (5.40)
                                        isolated curve

By definition of δW (m), the integral of the r.h.s. in any domain of Mg containing our base
point m = 0 is just exp[−d t], that is the contribution of an isolated genus g curve to Fg
is given by eq.(5.35).

5.12. Contribution to Fg from a continuous family of curves


      Typically the holomorphic maps are not isolated but belong to a family. We have to
say how we ‘count’ instantons in this case. In general a direct path–integral computation
 29
                   √
      The factor       t̄ arises because physically we have to normalize the Fermi zero–modes with
respect to the true metric (t + t̄)gij̄ , rather than with respect the reference one gij̄ .

                                                                     91
is quite hard. However, general principles [43] lead to an abstract formula for Nng1 ,...,nh
which is valid in full generality. In the A–model on a Calai–Yau 3–fold this formula is as
follows. Assume we have a family of holomorphic maps from genus g surfaces to M ,

                               fs : Σg (s) → M,                        s ∈ S,

where S is the space of parameters for the family. Over S we define the bundle V whose
fiber at s is the vector space

                                 V       = H 0 (Σg (s), K ⊗ fs∗ TM
                                                                 ∗
                                                                   ),
                                     s

and let r = rank(V). Then the contribution of this family to Fg reads
                                      Z         Z
                                     a      ∗
                             exp −t       f s ωa    cr (V),                            (5.41)
                                                  Σ
                                                                 S

that is the coefficient is just the integral over the moduli space S of the Euler class of the
bundle V. It is using this abstract formulation that Aspinwall and Morrison [8] were able
to prove the formula for contribution from multi–covers in genus zero that we mentioned
in section 2.

5.13. Contribution to Fg from constant maps


      We wish to compute the limit of Fg when t̄j̄ and ti go to infinity. The result of this
computation will be needed below to fix part of the ambiguities arising in the solution of
the anomaly equation. In this limit only the constant maps contribute to Fg .
      The moduli space of constant maps from a genus g surface to M is given by X =
Mg ⊗ M . There are three χ zero–modes spanning the fiber of the vector bundle30 π2∗ TM
over X, while the 3g ψ zero–modes span the fiber of the vector bundle

                                          V = π1∗ H ⊗ π2∗ TM
                                                           ∗
                                                             ,

where H is the Hodge bundle over Mg (i.e. the bundle whose fiber at m is H 0 (Σg (m), K)).
      Then the general formula [43] give
                                                            Z
                                         Fg            =        c3g (V).               (5.42)
                                              t,t̄→∞
                                                           X

 30
      πi is the projection into the i–th factor space of X = Mg ⊗ M .

                                                       92
It is easy to recover (5.42) by a direct path integral computation. In order to do this, we
introduce some notation. Let ωA (A = 1, . . . , g) be a basis of holomorphic one–forms on
                                                                   R
Σg (m), and the N ĀB be the inverse matrix of NAB̄ = Im ΩAB = ωA ∧ ω̄B . Then we put
                                         Z
                                 Aa AB = (µa ωA ) ∧ ωB ,                            (5.43)

and AAB = dma Aa AB . From the theory of variations of Hodge structure (which is
essentially the same thing as the tt∗ equations) we know that the curvature of the Hodge
bundle is PAB̄ab̄ dma ∧ dm̄b̄ where31

                                      PAB̄ab̄ = −AaAC N C D̄ A∗b̄D̄B̄ .

Then the curvature of V is given by
                     h                                                           i
             (B,β)
           R(A,α) = δαβ PAC̄ ab̄ N C̄B dma ∧ dm̄b̄ + δAB Rαγ̄σρ̄ Gγ̄β dxσ ∧ dx̄ρ̄ .                  (5.44)

      As t, t̄ → ∞ the theory gets coupled in a weaker and weaker way, and we can use per-
turbation theory (that is free fields). Then the derivatives of the scalars can be eliminated
using the free contraction [44]

                            h∂X α (z)∂¯X̄ β̄ (w̄)ig = Gβ̄α ωA (z)N AB̄ ω B̄ (w̄).                    (5.45)

We denote the 3g ψ zero modes, by ψαA (α = 1, 2, 3, A = 1, . . . , g) with

                                             ψα (z) = ψαA ωa (z).                                    (5.46)

In addition we have three constant zero–modes χα . The extra Fermi zero–modes are
                          R
absorbed by 3 factors of ( Rαβ̄ γ δ̄ χα χ̄β̄ ψγ ∧ ψ̄δ̄ ) extracted from the exponential of the
action. Using (5.46) and the definition of NAB̄ we get
                    Z
                       Rαβ̄ γ δ̄ χα χ̄β̄ ψγ ∧ ψ̄δ̄ = Rαβ̄ γ δ̄ χα χ̄β̄ ψγA ψ̄δ̄B̄ NAB̄ .

Then using (5.43) and (5.46), the contribution to (5.34) from the constant maps is re-
duced32 to an integral over the zero–modes ψαA , χα and xα of the following quantity

              (−i)3        h                               i3g−3                             3
                              A        C̄ ∗       β̄α B D̄               γ δ̄ α β̄ A B̄
                            ψ   A   ψ̄
                                  AB β̄  A       G   N             R αβ̄     χ χ̄ ψ  ψ̄
                                                                                    γ δ̄ NAB̄    .
        3!(3g − 3)! (2πi)3g α              C̄ D̄


 31
      Notice that if you interpret AaAB as the 3–point function on the sphere, this is just the tt∗
equation for the curvature.
 32
      As always, non–zero modes cancel by topological invariance.

                                                       93
After integrating away the χ’s, we remain with the integral over the ψ’s and the bosons of
                                                                            !3g
         (−1)g      h                                                i
                       αβ̄          a     b         αβ̄     γ     δ̄   A B̄
                     G PAB̄ ab̄ dm ∧ dm̄ + NAB̄ R γ δ̄ dx ∧ dx̄ ψα ψ̄β̄         .   (5.47)
      (3g)! (2πi)3g

Comparing with (5.34) we see that
                                                    Z
                         lim Fg ≡ lim                   Zg =
                       t,t̄→∞           t,t̄→∞
                                              Mg
                                                        Z                     Z                       (5.48)
                                               g                 R                         
                                    = (−1)                  det       =               c3g V ,
                                                                2πi
                                                   Mg ⊗M                    Mg ⊗M

which is eq.(5.42).
                        ∗
    The class c3g (H ⊗ TM ) can be related to the Chern classes of TM and H using the
‘splitting principle’. We use xi (resp. ya ) to denotes the ‘eigenvalues’ of the curvature of
                     ∗
the bundle H (resp. TM ). We start from the identity
         g Y
         Y 3                          g
                                    3 X
                                    Y
                   (xi + ya ) =                yag−r σr (xi )
         i=1 a=1                    a=1 r=0
                                        g                                                               (5.49)
                                        X
                                =                   y1g−r1 y2g−r2 y3g−r3 σr1 (xi )σr2 (xi )σr2 (xi ),
                                    r1 ,r2 ,r3 =0

where σr are the elementary symmetric functions. For c3g (V) we are interested in the
terms in (5.49) homogeneous of degree 3 in the y’s. For g > 2 they are given by
           X
                  y1r1 y2r2 y3r3 σg−r1 (xi )σg−r2 (xi )σg−r3 (xi ) ≡
       r1 +r2 +r3 =3

                       ≡ [σ1 (y)]3 σg−3 (x)[σg (x)]2 +
                         + σ1 (y)σ2 (y)[σg−2(x)σg−1 (x)σg (x) − 3σg−3 (x)σg (x)2 ]+
                         + σ3 (y)[σg−1 (x)3 − 3σg−2 (x)σg−1 (x)σg (x) + 3σg−3 (x)σg (x)2 ].
                                                                  ∗
In particular, this identity says that the component of c3g (H ⊗ TM ) which is a (3, 3)–form
on M reads
             ∗
                                                                              ∗
        c3 (TM ) c3g−1 − 3cg−2 cg−1 cg + 3cg−3 c2g + terms proportional to c1 (TM ),

where ck ≡ ck (H). Since for a Calabi–Yau manifold c1 (TM ) = 0, we have
                                 Z
                                     3
              lim Fg = −χ(M )        cg−1 − 3cg−2 ∧ cg−1 ∧ cg + 3cg−3 ∧ c2g .                           (5.50)
             t,t̄→∞
                                           Mg


                                                             94
The integral in the r.h.s. can be simplified. Indeed, as it is well known, the ck ’s are
not all independent. Let H be the de Rham bundle (i.e. the bundle over Mg with fiber
H 1 (Σg , C)). Obviously, H is a holomorphic subbundle33 of H and we have the exact
sequence
                                       0 → H → H → H∗ → 0.

Now, from the tt∗ geometry discussed in section 2, we know that H comes with a natural
flat connection — the ∇–connection — and hence

                                       1 = c(H) = c(H) c(H∗ ).

Then we have the following relation between the ck ’s
                                      g
                                       X                  g
                                                            X             
                                  1+         ck        1+         (−1)h ch = 1.             (5.51)
                                       k=1                  h=1

In particular, eq.(5.51) gives the c2k ’s as polynomials in the c2m+1 . The first few relations
are
                                                                     1
                              c2 = 21 (c1 )2 ,           c4 = c1 c3 − (c1 )4 .              (5.52)
                                                                     8
Equating the two sides of eq.(5.51) in degree 4g we get

                                                       c2g = 0,                             (5.53)

while in degree 4(g − 1) we get

                                         2cg cg−2 − c2g−1 = 0.

Using these two relations eq.(5.50) reduces to
                                                                    Z
                                    lim      Fg = 12 χ(M )              c3g−1 .             (5.54)
                                   t,t̄→∞
                                                                   Mg

                      R
      The integrals   Mg
                           c3g−1 , can be easily computed if we know the Chow ring of Mg . In
fact, by definition our ck are represented in the Chow ring by the tautological classes λk
(notations as in ref.[45]).
 33
      This is the same situation we encountered in section 2.1 in the context of special geometry
in section 2.1. The trivial bundle H plays here the same role as H 3 (M, C) in section 2.

                                                         95
    The Chow ring of Mg is explicitly known for g = 2 [45] and for g = 3 [46]. In
particular, for g = 2 th. 10.1 of ref.[45] gives
                                         Z
                                                              1
                                                  (c1 )3 =        ,
                                             M2              2880

while for g = 3 using eq.(5.52) and Table 10 of ref.[46] we have
                       Z                 Z
                                   1                              1        1
                                 3
                           (c2 ) =                (c1 )6 =             =        .
                        M3         8     M3                  8 · 90720   725760

Then
                                         χ(M )
                           Fg        =                                for g = 2
                                t,t̄→∞   5760
                                                                                    (5.55)
                                          χ(M )
                                       =                              for g = 3.
                                         1451520




                                                     96
6. Solution to the anomaly equation and Feynman rules for Fg

      In this section, we develop a systematic method to solve the holomorphic anomaly
equation                                                                                             !
                                                                               g−1
                                                                               X
                         1
                ∂ ī Fg = C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄      Dj Dk Fg−1 +                 Dj Fr Dk Fg−r       .   (6.1)
                         2                                                     r=1


6.1. Feyman rules at g = 2, 3

      As a warm– up, let us start with the genus–2 case.
                                    1
                        ∂ ī F2 =     C e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ (Dj ∂k F1 + ∂j F1 ∂k F1 ) .                           (6.2)
                                    2 īj̄ k̄
Interestingly enough, a key to solving this equation lies in a genus-0 object. Because the
Yukawa–coupling C īj̄ k̄ is totally symmetric in its indices and satisfies

                                              Dī C j̄ k̄l̄ = Dj̄ C īk̄l̄ ,

we can always integrate the Yukawa coupling locally as

                                           C īj̄ k̄ = e−2K Dī Dj̄ ∂¯k̄ S.                                  (6.3)

where S is a local section of L−2 . In fact, in all the examples we will discuss later, it is
possible to construct S globally on the moduli space of the topological theories. We will
present such constructions later in this section34 . To simplify the expressions below, we
use the following notation.

                                     Sī ≡ ∂¯ī S
                                                                                                             (6.4)
                                     Sīj ≡ ∂¯ī S j , where S j ≡ Gj j̄ Sj̄

In this notation,
                                                      jk
                                                    C ī = ∂¯ī S jk                                         (6.5)

where
                                jk
                              C ī ≡ C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ ,        S jk ≡ Gj j̄ Sj̄k .

 34
      In refs. [47], a solution to (6.3) is constructed using particular coordinates on the moduli
space. However S constructed there does not behave nicely under the modular transformation,
and thus is not globally defined on the moduli space. The explicit expressions of S we obtain in
various examples later differ from those obtained in these references.

                                                           97
    We now solve the genus-2 equation (6.2) by “integration-by-parts”. We first rewrite
(6.2) using (6.5) as
                                              
                   1 jk                            1
          ∂ ī F2 − S (Dj ∂k F1 + ∂j F1 ∂k F1 ) = − S jk ∂ ī (Dj ∂k F1 + ∂j F1 ∂k F1 )
                   2                               2
The r.h.s. can be evaluated using the holomorphic anomaly of F1 and the special geometry
relation for [∂ ī , Dj ] as
                    1
              − S jk ∂ ī (Dj ∂k F1 + ∂j F1 ∂k F1 ) =
                    2                                               
                      1 mn jk 1                                            χ
              = − C ī S              Cnmjk + Cmnj ∂k F1 + Cjkm ∂n F1 + Sīj ∂j F1
                      2           2                                        24
Now we repeat the integration-by-parts.
                     "
                             1
                ∂ ī F2 − S jk (Dj ∂k F1 + ∂j F1 ∂k F1 ) +
                             2
                                                                              #
                              1 mn jk 1                              χ j
                           + S S             Cnmjk + 2Cmnj ∂k F1 − S ∂j F1 =
                              4            2                        24
                                                             
                         1               1                        χ
                      = S mn S jk ∂ ī     Cnmjk + 2Cmnj ∂k F1 − S j ∂ ī ∂j F1 .
                         4               2                        24
It turns out that r.h.s. of this equation can also be written as a total derivative with
           i
respect to t . By using the genus–1 anomaly and the special geometry, we find
                                                        
                  1 mn jk          1                         χ
                    S S ∂ ī         Cnmjk + 2Cmnj ∂k F1 − S j ∂ ī ∂j F1 =
                  4                2                         24
                        "
                                         1            1
                  = ∂ ī S jk S pq S mn ( Cjkp Cmnq + Cjpm Ckqn )−
                                         8            12
                                                           #
                               χ j              χ  χ
                           − S Cjkl S kl + ( − 1)S .
                               48               24 24
Thus the iteration stops here. We have converted the genus-two anomaly equation (6.2)
into the following form.
               ∂ ī F2 =
                       "
                         1            1                  1
                = ∂ ī S jk Dj ∂k F1 + S jk ∂j F1 ∂k F1 − S jk S mn Cjkmn −
                         2            2                  8
                      1                        χ
                     − S jk Cjkm S mn ∂n F1 + S j ∂j F1 +                          (6.6)
                      2                       24
                      1 jk        pq        mn   1
                     + S Cjkp S Cqmn S         + S jk S pq S mn Cjpm Ckqn −
                      8                          12 #
                       χ               χ χ
                     − S j Cjkl S kl + ( − 1)S .
                      48               24 24

                                             98
    Now one can easily integrate this equation as
                       1 ij (1) 1 (1) ij (1) 1 jk mn
                F2 =     S Cij + Ci S Cj − S S Cjkmn −
                       2          2               8
                          1                    χ     (1)
                       − S ij Cijm S mn Cn(1) + S i Ci +
                          2                    24                                        (6.7)
                          1 ij                     1
                       + S Cijp S pq Cqmn S mn + S ij S pq S mn Cipm Cjqn −
                          8                       12
                          χ i       jk     χ χ
                       − S Cijk S + ( − 1)S + f2 (t)
                          48              24 24
                                (g)
where we used the notation Ci1 ···in = Di1 · · · Din F (g) . This equation can be expressed
graphically as in Fig. 17.


                                  = -        1_
                                              2
                                                               + 1_2                 +


                     + _1        + 1_2                          +                    +
                         8


                                                                  1_
                     +           + 1_8                          + 12             +


                     + 1_2                        + 1_2


                       + 1_2                      + 1_2                + f2(t)

                                         i        j
                                                      = -Sij
                                         i            = -Si
                                                      = -2S
         Fig. 17: The terms obtained by solving the anomaly equation for genus
         2 have a strong resemblance to Feynman graphs with correct symmetry
         factors and with an appropriate definition of vertices. This correspon-
         dence can be made precise as discussed in the text. We identify the
         solid lines with the massless moduli modes and the dotted lines with
         the dilaton field. These graphs fix F2 up to a holomorphic function of
         moduli represented by f2 (t).

                                                      99
    Here f2 (t) is some meromorphic object which is not fixed at this stage. Since both F2
and S are section of L−2 and Cijk is a section of L2 × Sym3 T on the moduli space, f2 must
be a meromorphic section of L−2 . Although we cannot determine f2 from the holomorphic
anomaly alone, the holomorphicity gives rather stringent constraints on f2 and, in many
cases, almost uniquely determines it. In the case of the topological sigma–model, we can
exploit the geometric meaning of F2 studied in Section 4 to fix f2 . In the next section, we
will demonstrate this procedure in various examples.
    This method also works in the case of g = 3. After six iterations of integration-by-
parts, we obtain

           1        (2)      (1)      (2) χ             (2)
       F3 = S ij Cij + Ci S ij Cj + ( + 2)S i Ci +
           2                              24
                         (1)     1           (2)    1       (1)
           + 2F2 S i Ci − S ij Cijk S kl Cl − S ij S kl Cijkl −
                                 2                  4                                  (6.8)
             1          (1)       (1)   1       (1) (1)
           − S ij Cijk S kl Cl − S ij S kl Cik Cjl +
             2                          4
           + · · · (it would take five more pages to write them all) · · · + f3 (t).

Here f3 (t) is a meromorphic section of L−4 . Genus 3 contribution is presented in Fig. 18.


                                         1
                                         _
                                  = -    2
                                                       +                    +


                   +                         +                      +


                   + 1_2                     + 1_4            +


                   + 1_2                     + 1_4                +… + f3(t)

         Fig. 18: Some of the Feynman graphs which emerge in solving the
         genus 3 anomaly equation.

    One may observe that the equations (6.7) and (6.8) have a strong resemblance to the
Feynman rule (see Fig. 17). Consider a finite dimensional quantum system with (−S ij )
                                                                                        (1)
as a propagator connecting the indices i and j, Cijk , Cijkl ,...as classical vertices, Ci ,

                                                 100
 (1)
Cij ,... as one-loop corrected vertices etc, and compute two- and three-loop partition
functions according to the Feynman rule. If we multiply an overall factor of (−1) after
the computation, we reproduce all the terms in (6.7) and (6.8) including all the symmetry
factors, except for those containing S i , S and the holomorphic sections f2 and f3 .
       The terms involving S i and S can also be recovered if we introduce one more degree
of freedom ϕ and extend the Feynman rule as follows. The propagators are given as

                          K ij = −S ij ,   K iϕ = −S i ,   K ϕ,ϕ = −2S                   (6.9)

and the vertices are given by

                        e(g)                               e(g)
                        Ci1 ···in ,ϕm+1 = (2g − 2 + n + m)Ci1 ···in ,ϕm
                        e(g) = C (g) ,
                        C                          Ce(1) = χ − 1.                       (6.10)
                         i1 ···in      i1 ···in       ϕ
                                                           24
                        e (0)          e  (0)      e (0)          e (1) = 0.
                        Cϕm = 0, Ci,ϕm = 0, Cij,ϕm = 0, C

Compute two- and three-loop partition functions using this Feynman rule and multiply
the overall factor of (−1) after the computation. By adding the meromorphic sections f2
and f3 , we recover the expressions (6.7) and (6.8). The definition (6.10) of the vertices
reminds us of the puncture equation in the topological gravity. In fact, we will now identify
the variable ϕ with the dilaton which is the first topological descendant of the puncture
operator [4] σ1 (P ). All the other topological descendants decouple from the correlation
functions simply by the U (1) charge conservation and thus the only non-vanishing corre-
lation functions involve those of marginal fields and the dilaton field. So far we have only
discussed the marginal fields. To properly discuss the dilaton field coupling we need to
enlarge the field space from that of pure topological theory. However luckily the correlation
for the dilaton field can quite generally be eliminated from correlation functions by the
recursion relations. In fact the first equation in (6.10) is precisely the general recursion
relation of [4] and so ϕ is indeed the dilaton field.

6.2. Feynman rules for arbitrary g

       The emergence of the Feynman rule is rather mysterious from the way we discovered it
at g = 2 and 3. It would be extremely difficult to prove the Feynman rule for g ≥ 4 by using
the method in the above since the number of iterations would grow exponentially. Thus
we will develop another technique which enables us to prove the Feynman rule directly
for all g. We will do so by reducing the Feynman rule for Fg to the Schwinger–Dyson

                                                101
equation of the finite dimensional system. In Section 3, we introduced the generating
                                  (g)
function W (λ, x; t, t) for Ci1 ···in which satisfies

                     ∂
                      i
                        exp(W ) =
                    ∂t                                      
                         λ2 jk ∂ 2            j  ∂     k ∂
                                                            
                    =      C          − Gīj x λ    +x         exp(W ).
                         2 ī ∂xj ∂xk            ∂λ     ∂xk

                                                                               f (λ, x, ϕ, t, t)
To prove the Feynman rule, it is more useful to consider a generating function W
                 e (g)
for the vertices C     m of the Feynman rule.
                   i1 ···in ,ϕ

                                          ∞ X
                                          X ∞
                 f (λ, x, ϕ; t, t) =                  1 g−1 e(g)
                 W                                       λ Ci1 ···in ;ϕm xi1 · · · xin ϕm
                                          g=0 n,m=0
                                                    n!m!

                                          f is related to W as
By the definition of the vertices (6.10), W

       f (λ, x, ϕ; t, t) =
       W
           ∞ X
           X ∞                                2g−2+n                  
               1          2g−2    (g)     1              χ            1
        =           λ            Ci1 ···in xi1 · · · xin
                                                      + ( − 1) log
          g=0 n
                 n!                     1−ϕ              24          1−ϕ
                                     
                λ     x           χ
        =W          ,   ; t, t −     − 1 log λ.
               1−ϕ 1−ϕ            24

     f satisfies the equation
Thus W
                                     2                            
                      ∂       f      λ jk ∂ 2                  j ∂       f ).
                        i
                          exp(W ) =     C ī    j ∂xk
                                                      − Gīj x       exp(W                  (6.11)
                     ∂t               2      ∂x                 ∂ϕ

     It turns out that there is another function of xi and ϕ which satisfies almost the same
equation as (6.11). It is given as follows.

                                  1          i j          i          2
                                                                        1    det ∆
        Y (λ, x, ϕ; t, t) = −       2
                                      ∆ ij x  x  + 2∆iϕ x   ϕ + ∆ϕϕ ϕ   + log( 2 )          (6.12)
                                 2λ                                      2     λ

Here ∆ is an inverse of the propagator K defined by (6.9), i.e.

                                           S ij ∆jk + S i ∆kϕ = −δki
                                           S ij ∆jϕ + S i ∆ϕϕ = 0
                                                                                            (6.13)
                                           S i ∆ij + 2S∆jϕ = 0
                                           S i ∆iϕ + 2S∆ϕϕ = −1.

                                                           102
Thus Y may be regarded as a kinetic term for the finite dimensional system of xi and ϕ.
The most important properties of these inverse propagators are
                                       mn
                         ∂ ī ∆jk = C ī ∆mj ∆nk + Gīj ∆kϕ + Gīj ∆jϕ
                                       mn
                         ∂ ī ∆jϕ = C ī ∆mj ∆n + Gīj ∆ϕϕ
                                       mn
                         ∂ ī ∆ϕϕ = C ī ∆mϕ ∆nϕ

                                                                                        (g)
which we can derive from (6.4) and (6.5). Just as the anomaly equations for Ci1 ···in are
encoded in (6.11), the above equations for ∆’s can be written as a differential equation for
Y.                                                            
                     ∂              λ2 jk ∂ 2              j ∂
                       i
                         exp(Y ) = − C ī         − Gīj x       exp(Y )                      (6.14)
                    ∂t              2     ∂xj ∂xk           ∂ϕ
     Now we consider the following integral.
                                            Z
                                   Z=                        f)
                                                dxdϕ exp(Y + W                                (6.15)


Although this integral itself may be divergent, we can compute its perturbative expansion
with respect to λ. The integral Z may be regarded as a partition function of a finite
dimensional quantum system with dynamical variables xi and ϕ, and the perturbative
expansion of Z can be evaluated using the standard technique of the Feynman rule as
                                                         
                2         1 ij (1) 1 (1) ij (1)
      log Z = λ F2 − S Cij − Ci S Cj + · · · +
                          2          2
                                                       
                4         1 ij (2)     (1) ij (2)
            + λ F3 − S Cij − Ci S Cj + · · · +
                          2
                                                                                            (6.16)
                6         1 ij (3)     (1) ij (3)    1 (2) ij (2)
            + λ F4 − S Cij − Ci S Cj − Ci S Cj + · · · +
                          2                          2
                            "                       g−1
                                                                           #
                                   1     (g−1)    1 X     (r)    (g−r)
            + · · · + λ2g−2 Fg − S ij Cij      −        Ci S ij Cj     +··· +···
                                   2              2 r=1

where (· · ·) in the coefficient of λ2 represents the terms in the r.h.s. of (6.7), (· · ·) in the
coefficient of λ4 represents those in (6.8), and so on.
     Previously we found, by the iterative method, that the coefficients of λ2 and λ4 in the
perturbative expansion of Z are holomorphic in t. We can now prove the holomorphicity of
Z to all order in the perturbation as the Schwinger–Dyson equation of the finite dimensional

                                                  103
system. By using (6.11) and (6.14), we obtain
                 Z            2                                   
          ∂                Y λ       jk     ∂2               j ∂       e+
            i
              Z = dxdϕ e           C ī      j    k
                                                    − Gīj x          eW
         ∂t                     2         ∂x ∂x               ∂ϕ
                   Z              2                2
                                                                         
                             We       λ jk ∂                        j ∂
                 + dxdϕ e          − C ī                  − Gīj x        eY
                                        2       ∂xj ∂xk               ∂ϕ
                        Z                                                         
                 λ2 jk               ∂         Y ∂      We           ∂     We  ∂    Y
                = C ī     dxdϕ              e        (e ) −              e       (e ) −
                 2                  ∂xj          ∂xk              ∂xj         ∂xk
                          Z
                                       ∂ h j Y +W   e
                                                       i
                   − Gīj dxdϕ              x e          .
                                     ∂ϕ
The point is that the integrand in the r.h.s. of this equation is total derivative with respect
to xi and ϕ. In the perturbative expansion, we are free to perform the integration-by-part
and drop boundary terms since integrals involved in the perturbation are all Gaussian.
Thus we have derived
                                               ∂
                                         i
                                           Z=0
                                      ∂t
As is evident from the expansion (6.16), the holomorphicity of Z means that we can
express Fg as a meromorphic section fg of L2−2g minus a sum over the Feynman graphs
constructed from the propagators (6.9) and the vertices (6.10).

6.3. Construction of propagators

     So far we have assumed that there is a global section S of L−2 which satisfies (6.3).
Now we are going to construct such an object. The important ingredient is again the
special geometry relation
                                                                                km
                        Rij̄l k = −∂ j̄ Γkil = Gij̄ δlk + Gkj̄ δik − Cilm C j̄ .           (6.17)

Since Gij̄ = ∂i ∂ j̄ K, this can be rewritten as
                                                h                     i
                                  jk                  j        j    j
                           ∂ ī [S Cklm ] = ∂ ī ∂l Kδm + ∂m Kδl + Γlm .

This can be easily integrated as

                             S ij Cjkl = δli ∂k K + δki ∂l K + Γikl + fkl
                                                                       i
                                                                                           (6.18)

       i
where fkl is some meromorphic object which should compensate for the non-covariance of
∂k K and Γikl in the r.h.s. side. We can express fkl
                                                  i
                                                     as
                                                            n
                                                            X
                       i
                      fkl = δli ∂k log f + δki ∂l log f −         vl,a ∂k v i,a + fekl
                                                                                    i
                                                                                       ,
                                                            a=1

                                                   104
where f is a meromorphic section of L, {v i,a }a=1,...,n (n is the dimensions of the moduli
space) are meromorphic tangent vectors which are linearly independent almost everywhere
                                                 P
on the moduli space, vi,a are inverse of v i,a (   vi,a v j,a = δ i ) and fei is a meromorphic
                                                           a            j        kl
                    2
section of T × Sym T       ∗
                               . In general, (6.18) has 2 n (n + 1) equations for 21 n(n + 1) variables
                                                        1 2

S ij and it is over-determined when n > 1. Thus we should make an appropriate choice of
fei to ensure that (6.18) is solvable with respect to S ij .
 kl
     The situation is much simpler in the one-modulus case since there is only one equation
in (6.18) and there is no constraint on fe1 . In order to construct Fg by using the Feynman
                                                        11
                                                                                                              11
rule, (6.7) and (6.8) for example, we do not need the most general solution to ∂S 11 = C 1̄
since any holomorphic ambiguity in S 11 is absorbed into the holomorphic section fg which
we add to Fg at the end of the computation. Thus we can, for example, choose fe1 = 0.                    11
                      11
With this choice, S        becomes
                                       1                                              
                          S 11 =              2∂ log(eK |f |2 ) − (G11̄ v)−1 ∂(vG11̄ )                    (6.19)
                                      C111

      To find S i , we need to integrate

                                                    ∂ ī S j = Gik̄ S jk .

Substituting (6.19) into this, we obtain

                                        1                                                    
                           ∂S 1 =                2∂ log(eK |f |2 )G11̄ − v −1 ∂(vG11̄ )
                                     C111
                                      1                                     
                                   =      ∂ (∂ log(eK |f |2 ))2 − v −1 ∂(v∂K) .
                                     C111

A special solution to this equation can be easily found as
                                  1    h                         2                                 i
                      1                             K        2             −1             K    2
                    S =                    ∂ log(e |f | )             −v        ∂ v∂ log(e |f | )         (6.20)
                                C111
      Finally we need to find S which satisfies

                                                     ∂S = G11̄ S 1̄ .                                     (6.21)

A special solution to this equation is given by
                                                   
                               1           1 11 2
                    S = S − D1 S − (S ) C111 ∂ log(eK |f |2 )+
                            1         11
                               2           2
                                                                                                          (6.22)
                            1         1
                         + D1 S 1 + S 11 S 1 C111 .
                            2         2
                                                             105
Let us check that this indeed satisfies (6.21). We first note that the following special
combination of S 1 and S 11 is holomorphic
                                                  
                         1   1    11   1 11 2
                   ∂ S − D1 S − (S ) C111 =
                             2         2
                                 1              1                       11
                    = G11̄ S 11 − [∂, D1 ]S 11 − (G11̄ )2 ∂C 1̄1̄1̄ − C 1̄ S 11 C111
                                 2              2
                    = 0,

where we used the special geometry relation35 (6.17), the definitions of S 1 and S 11 and
∂C 1̄1̄1̄ = 0. Now it is straightforward to check the equation (6.21) as

                               1               1
                 ∂S =G11̄ S 1 − G11̄ D1 S 11 − G11̄ (S 11 )2 C111 +
                               2               2
                        1              1          1 11              1
                     + [∂, D1 ]S 1 + D1 S1̄1 + C 1̄ S 1 C111 + S 11 S1̄1 C111
                        2              2          2                 2
                               1              1  11
                    =G11̄ S 1 + [∂, D1 ]S 1 + C 1̄ S 1 C111
                               2              2
                            1
                    =G11̄ S .

Here we once again used the special geometry relation36 .
      To summarize, in the one-modulus case, the propagators S 11 , S 1 , and S are given as

                               1                                              
                    S 11 =      ∂ log 2∂ log(eK |f |2 ) − (G11̄ v)−1 ∂(vG11̄ )
                          C111
                            1 h                    2                           i
                     S1 =          ∂ log(eK |f |2 ) − v −1 ∂ v∂ log(eK |f |2 )
                          C
                           111                             
                             1    1           1 11 2
                      S = S − D1 S − (S ) C111 ∂ log(eK |f |2 )+
                                         11
                                  2           2
                             1           1
                          + D1 S 1 + S 11 S 1 C111 .
                             2           2

      In the multi-moduli case, (6.18) gives
                                                           n
                                                           X
         S ij Cjkl = (δli ∂k + δki ∂l ) log(eK |f |2 ) −         vl,a Giī ∂k (v m,a Gmī ) + fekl
                                                                                                i
                                                                                                   .   (6.23)
                                                           a=1


In order to obtain an expression for S ij from this equation, we need to “invert” the
Yukawa coupling. Although we do not know if it is possible to do so in general, it is
 35                                                                                               11
      D1 S 11 = (∂ − 2Γ11       11
                       1 − 2∂K)S . Therefore [∂, D1 ]S
                                                       11
                                                          = 2G11̄ S 11 − 2C111 C 1̄ S 11 .
 36                                                 1              1            11
      D1 S 1 = (∂ − Γ11       1
                     1 − 2∂K)S . Therefore [∂, D1 ]S = −C111 C 1̄ S .


                                                    106
certainly possible for the A-model discussed in section 4. In this model, each chiral field
corresponds to a Kähler form in the target space and, in the large volume limit, the Yukawa
coupling Cijk is given as an intersection of the three Kähler forms. There is a distinguished
Kähler modulus t1 in this model corresponding to an overall scaling of the target space
metric. In the large volume limit t1 → ∞, the Yukawa coupling Cij1 then gives the inner
product of the two Kähler forms ki and kj , and it is non-degenerate as an n × n matrix,
det(Cij1 )i,j=1,...,n 6= 0. Since det(Cij1 ) is holomorphic in t, this means that det(Cij1 )
should be non-zero almost everywhere on the moduli space. Therefore we can invert Cij1
in (6.23) to find an expression for S ij , provided we made an appropriate choice of fei .                    kl
                                                                                    j        ij
     As in the one-modulus case, we substitute (6.23) into ∂ ī S = Gīi S                        to obtain
                        ∂ ī [S j ]Cjkl =Gīl ∂k log(eK |f |2 ) + Gīk ∂l log(eK |f |2 )+
                                                n
                                                X
                                            −         vl,a ∂k (v m,a Gīm ) + fekl
                                                                                i
                                                                                   Gīi .
                                                a=1

This can be easily integrated as
                                                             n
                                                             X                                   
         i                   K     2
       S Cijk =∂j log(e |f | )∂k log(e |f | ) − K      2
                                                                   vk,a ∂j v l,a ∂l log(eK |f |2 ) +
                                                             a=1                                              (6.24)
                       + fejk
                           l
                              ∂l log(eK |f |2 ) + fejk .

Here fejk is a meromorphic section of Sym2 T ∗ . As in the case of S ij in (6.23), with an
appropriate choice of fejk , we can invert the Yukawa coupling in the above and obtain an
expression for S i .
     To complete the Feynman rule, we need S which satisfies

                                                 ∂ ī S = Gīi S i .                                          (6.25)

A special solution to this equation is given by
                      1                                       
                 S=       (n + 1)S i − Dj S ij − S ij S kl Cjkl ∂i log(eK |f |2 )+
                     2n                                                                (6.26)
                           1        i    i jk
                                                  
                       +       Di S + S S Cijk .
                          2n
Let us check that this satisfies (6.25). As in the case of one-modulus, the following combi-
nation of S i and S ij is holomorphic due to the special geometry relation and ∂ ī Cjkl = 0.
                                                               
                      ∂ ī (n + 1)S j − Dk S jk − S jk S mn Cjmn =
                         = (n + 1)Gīk S jk − [∂ ī , Dk ]S jk − Gj j̄ Gkk̄ ∂k C īj̄ k̄ −
                                       jk                    mn
                                 − C ī S mn Ckmn − C ī S jk Ckmn
                         = 0.

                                                           107
We can then compute ∂ ī S as

               n+1
         ∂ ī S =       S+
                2n ī
                    1                                                       kl
                                                                                                      
               +          [∂ ī , Dj ]S j + Dj Sīj + Sīj S kl Cjkl + S j C ī Cjkl − Sīj S kl Cjkl
                   2n
              =Gīj S j .

Here again, we used the special geometry relation for [∂ ī , Dj ].
    Thus we have prepared all the ingredients we need for the Feynman rule of Fg . In the
next section, we will construct Fg explicitly in several examples.




                                                     108
7. Examples — the experimental evidence

    In this section we show how to compute higher loop partition function Fg (for small
g) for some examples. We will elaborate in details how the perturbation theory developed
in previous section works. The simplest and most trivial example would be a three di-
mensional complex torus. In this case there is nothing to compute. All loop partitions
functions are identically equal to zero due to fermion zero modes. The simplest way to get
a non zero answer is to orbifoldize the model. Below we will consider two examples — the
Z3 ⊗ Z3 orbifold model and the quintic — in detail, and comment on some other models
also at the end.

7.1. Orbifold

    Let us start with some definitions. Z3 ⊗ Z3 orbifold is obtained by dividing T 2 ×
T 2 × T 2 , with each torus having a Z3 symmetry, by the discrete group generated by
g = diag (1, ω, ω 2) and h = diag (ω, ω 2 , 1). This model has 3 untwisted Kähler moduli
corresponding to the moduli of each of the tori and 81 corresponding to the blow up modes.
This orbifold is rigid and has no complex moduli. The Euler characteristic χ = 168. We
will denote the Kähler moduli of each of the three tori by τa (a = 1, 2, 3). The Kähler
potential is given as follows
                                                              3
                                                              Y
                                          −K(τi ,τ̄i )
                                      e                  =i         (τi − τ̄i ).
                                                              i=1

The only non zero component of Yukawa coupling is C123 = 1. Zamolodchikov’s metric is
diagonal and is equal to
                                                              δab
                                             Gab̄ = −
                                                          (τa − τ̄a )2
We also need the genus one partition function, which is equal to
                                               X
                                 F1 = −κ            log(τa − τ̄a )|η 2 (τa )|2 ,
                                                a

where κ = 4 for this orbifold. In spite of the fact that it is easy to solve the equations
for F2 and F3 directly, we first review the ingredients of perturbation technique. In case
of orbifold the equations for different components of propagator S ab , S a and S are very
simple

                             1                               S ab                                  Sa
          ∂¯c S ab = −                ,     ∂¯b S a = −                ,           ∂¯a S = −                ,   (7.1)
                         (τc − τ̄c )2                     (τb − τ̄b )2                         (τa − τ̄a )2

                                                         109
where (abc) is a permutation of (123) and S ab = 0 for a = b. Integrating this equations
we obtain                                                    
                       ab           1               η ′ (τc )
                     S =−                   +2
                                (τc − τ̄c )         η(τc )
                                                 ′
                                                                                      
                       a         1             η (τb )              1         η ′ (τc )
                      S =                +2                                +2                (7.2)
                            (τb − τ̄b )         η(τb )         (τc − τ̄c )    η(τc )
                            Y                              ′
                                                                   
                                         1                η (τa )
                       S =−                         +2                ,
                              a
                                    (τ a −  τ̄ a )        η(τ  a )

where (abc) is a permutation of (123). At every integration step the holomorphic piece
was fixed by modular invariance. For example, integrating the equation for S ab we obtain
S ab = −1/(τc − τ̄c )2 + f (τc ). The untwisted moduli space of Kähler structures for this
orbifold is the product of three copies of fundamental domain in the upper half plane
modulo symmetry group. The condition of modular invariance fixes f (τ ) = 2η ′ (τ )/η(τ ).
Similar arguments lead to the answers (7.2). It is easy to verify that all diagrams give rise
to the same type of contribution and therefore F2 is proportional to S (this is in fact a
peculiarity of orbifold example). One can also solve the equation for genus two directly.
In this case the anomaly equation reads

                                             1     1
                                  ∂¯a F2 = −                ∂b F1 ∂c F1
                                             2 (τa − τ̄a )2

Taking into account the explicit form of F1 , one can easily integrate the above equation37
                                                                                        
                            1 Y         κ2 Y                      1          η ′ (τa )
                      F2 =      ∂a F1 =                                   +2
                           2κ a         2 a                   (τa − τ̄a )    η(τa )

      The equation for genus 3 is given as follows

                               1     1                   2                 2
                     ∂¯a F3 =                2
                                               [(∂b +          )(∂c +           )F2 +
                               2 (τa − τ̄a )          τb − τ̄b         τc − τ̄c
                                                                                             (7.3)
                                         2                             2
                         ∂b F1 (∂c +            )F2 + ∂c F1 (∂b +            )F2 ]
                                     τc − τ̄c                       τb − τ̄b

 37
      If we considered the non-abelian orbifold obtained by the above one modded out by a further
symmetry which permutes the three tori, we would have ended up with one untwisted modulus
and then Fg would be a modular function of weight 6g − 6 with respect to this modulus. In this
case even at genus 2 we would have to fix the coefficient of holomorphic contribution to F2 as
there is a modular form of weight 6.

                                                    110
As usual (abc) is a permutation of (123). After substitution the genus-two solution obtained
above the equation (7.3) becomes

                         1      1                         2                      2
              ∂¯a F3 =                 2
                                         ∂a F1 [(∂b +          )∂b F1 (∂c +            )∂c F1 +
                        4κ (τa − τ̄a )                τb − τ̄b                τc − τ̄c
                                  2                                   2
              (∂b F1 )2 (∂c +            )∂c F1 + (∂c F1 )2 (∂b +           )∂b F1 ]
                              τc − τ̄c                             τb − τ̄b

The expression in brackets does not depend on τa and therefore we only need to solve the
equation
                                                1     1
                                       ∂¯a f =                 ∂a F1                              (7.4)
                                               4κ (τa − τ̄a )2
We must be careful at this point since the solution is not unique. The reason for this is
the existence of modular form of weight four η ′′ (τ )/η(τ ) − 3(η ′ (τ )/η(τ ))2 . The general
solution for (7.4) is given as follows

                            3
                            X                       1               2
                      f=          x(∂a F1 )2 + (      − κx)(∂a +          )∂a F1 ,
                            a=1
                                                   8κ            τa − τ̄a

where x is an arbitrary parameter. The condition of permutation symmetry forces the
coefficients in front of the two terms to be equal to each other. As a result we obtain a
fully symmetric solution for genus-three partition function

                       X3
                 1                     2                         2
      F3 =                  (∂a +            )∂a F1 (∂a+1 +              )∂a+1 F1 (∂a+2 F1 )2 +
             8κ(κ + 1) a=1          τa − τ̄a                τa+1 − τ̄a+1
                    3                   ′       2 !
                   Y    η ′′ (τa )       η (τa )
             + C0                  −3                  ,
                   a=1
                          η(τ )           η(τ )

where C0 is an arbitrary constant and it can not be determined from the anomaly equation.
    This phenomenon persists at every genus whenever there is a modular form of ap-
propriate weight. Unfortunately we do not know the asymptotic behavior of Fg for the
orbifold to fix the ambiguity. An analysis along the line of section 5 done for the orbifolds
would be needed to fix this ambiguity.

7.2. Quintic

    Quintic hypersurface can be described as the vanishing locus of a homogeneous poly-
nomial of degree 5 of five variables W (xi ) = 0 which determines the embedding of complex
3–fold in P4 . This Calabi Yau 3–fold has 101 complex moduli, all these moduli can be

                                                     111
thought as the coefficients of the polynomial, and 1 Kähler moduli, which can be thought
as the Kähler class of P4 .
    To construct the mirror manifold one starts with a 1-parameter subfamily of quintic
hypersurfaces given by
                                           X
                               W (xi ) ≡        x5i − 5ψx0 x1 x2 x3 x4 = 0 .

All these Mψ hypersurfaces are invariant under the discrete group Z35 . Following construc-
tion of [48] one may obtain the mirror family Wψ by dividing out the discrete symmetries.
    The mirror manifold W has only 1 complex moduli and 101 Kahler moduli. One
can describe the mirror family Wψ using the same complex parameter ψ as for Mψ (for
construction of mirror map see [7]). The variations of ψ can be identified with deformations
of complex structure of the mirror W . The multiplication of ψ by a fifth root of unity
α = e2iπ/5 can be always undone by appropriate change of variables xi and therefore
ψ → αψ is a modular transformation. All physical observables are invariant under ψ → αψ.
The modular parameter ψ describes a degenerate Calabi–Yau 3–fold only for ψ = 1 and
ψ = ∞. For ψ = 1 the corresponding Calabi–Yau is conifold, while for ψ = ∞ the
corresponding Calabi–Yau manifold is a singular quintic. In spite of the fact that ψ and αψ
correspond to the same complex structure the point ψ = 0 is a regular point corresponding
to one of Gepner’s model.
    The purpose of this section is to present the computations of numbers of holomorphic
curves of low genus in the quintic hypersurface. To be more precise there is no holomorphic
isolated curves for genus bigger then one. The numbers we compute are in fact the Euler
characteristics of the corresponding families as discussed in section 5.10. We will follow
the following logic in this section. We first compute the elements of the diagram technique
for fixed ψ but in the limit ψ̄ → ∞. We discuss the holomorphic ambiguity by requiring
regularity Fg (ψ) everywhere except ψ = 1 and ψ = ∞. Then by making a mirror transform
and expanding in instantons we extract the numbers in question.
    The holomorphic three form Ω is taken in the gauge

                                                   x4 dx0 dx1 dx2
                                       Ω = 5ψ
                                                     ∂W/∂x3

In the same gauge the Yukawa coupling is equal to
                                           Z                        3
                                                  ∂ 3Ω         2πi          5ψ 2
                          Cψψψ = −             Ω∧      =                         .
                                                  ∂ψ 3          5         1 − ψ5

                                                    112
    Different components of the propagator are expressed in terms of the Kähler potential,
Zamolodchikov’s metric and two sections f ∈ L and v ∈ T ∗ (see formulas (6.19), (6.20)
and (6.22)). The Kähler potential always enters into invariant combination eK |f |2 , while
metric enters in the invariant combination Gψ ψ̄ |v|2 . As ψ goes to 0, eK diverges as |ψ|−2 ,
while the metric remains finite. The condition of regularity at the origin implies that f
should necessarily have a zero at ψ = 0, while v remains finite. The regularity condition
at the origin and the absence of any additional singularities except possibly at ψ = ∞ and
ψ = 1 implies the following ansatz for f and v

                         f (ψ) = ψ(1 − ψ 5 )a ,        v(ψ) = (1 − ψ 5 )b ,

where a and b are some constants. The precise choice of these sections is irrelevant since
any holomorphic ambiguity can be reabsorbed into the section f2 which we add to the
final answer F2 . From the general formulas (6.19), (6.20) and (6.22) one can immediately
deduce that for small ψ
                     2          2
              ψψ    ∂       2    ∂                     ∂     ∂
            S            ∼ψ           ,          Sψ      ∼ψ    and            S ∼ const .
                   ∂ψ           ∂ψ                    ∂ψ    ∂ψ
    The behavior of the perturbation series near singularity ψ = 1 follows from the general
arguments presented in the Section 5 (see equation (5.24)). In order to apply the formula
(5.24) we need to find the canonical coordinate near ψ = 1 which is an interesting example
of how different a canonical coordinate can be from the special coordinate. In fact the
canonical coordinate at this point is just

                                       t ∼ −log(1 − ψ 5 ).

as can be seen from the fact that in this coordinate Γttt and all its holomorphic derivatives
go to zero as ψ → 1. Taking into account the explicit form of the Yukawa coupling which
in the ψ coordinate behaves as
                                                       1
                                       Cψψψ ∼
                                                   (1 − ψ 5 )
and that                               h ∂ψ i3
                              Cttt =             Cψψψ ∼ (1 − ψ 5 )2
                                        ∂t
and using formula (5.24) we find that
                                 h         i2g−2
                                  ∂t3 Cttt              ag
                          Fg ∼ h           i3g−3 ∼
                                                   (1 − ψ 5 )2g−2
                                   ∂t Cttt

                                                 113
as ψ → 1.
    To discuss the large ψ̄ limit let us recall that special coordinates of special geometry
are nothing else but canonical coordinates around infinity. One may regard the mirror
map ψ → t as a transformation to canonical coordinates. Using the general properties of
canonical coordinates we conclude that Zamolodchikov’s metric Gψ ψ̄ and Kähler potential
K(ψ, ψ̄) have the following expansion
                                                       dt dψ̄
                                        Gψ ψ̄ dψ̄ =C           + o(ψ̄ −3 )
                                                       dψ ψ̄ 2                        ,
                                                                             −1
                                        K(ψ, ψ̄) = − log ̟0 (ψ) + o(ψ̄            )

where C is some constant and ̟0 (ψ) is the solution of Pickard-Fuchs equation (we are
following the notations of [7]). The passage to canonical coordinate implies the change of
gauge in such a way that all holomorphic derivatives of K vanish. Namely

                                           K −→ K + log ̟0 + const

(see the discussion at the end of section 2). The choice of const is equivalent to the choice
of string coupling constant, and we will choose it in such a way that Yukawa coupling has
an integral expansion (const = 3 log(2πi/5)).
    In computing the higher genus amplitudes of this example it is convenient first to take
the t̄ → ∞ while fixing t. This is useful because in this limit as discussed in section 5.10,
there is some information about the behaviour of Fg (as counting of holomorphic maps of
genus g in Calabi–Yau). We use this correspondence to fix the holomorphic ambiguity in
integrating the anomaly equation.
    To consider the t̄ → ∞ we use the results discussed at the end of section 2 to simplify
the formulas for different components of propagator. Indeed, plugging these expansions
into (6.19) and (6.20) we obtain the following result
                                  3                                    2 !
                ψψ            5         1 − ψ5            dt         f
            S        =                         ∂ψ log        v
                             2πi          5ψ 2            dψ         ̟0
                                  3
                 ψ            5         1 − ψ5 h                2   −1
                                                                                        i
              S =                               (∂ψ log(f /̟0 )) + v ∂ψ v∂ψ log(f /̟0 )
                             2πi          5ψ 2
There is not much simplifications in the expression for S. Namely,
                                                        
                         ψ    1      ψψ   1 ψψ 2
                 S = S − Dψ S − (S ) Cψψψ ∂ψ log(f /̟0 )
                              2           2
                           1           1
                        + Dψ S ψ + S ψψ S ψ Cψψψ .
                           2           2
                                                          114
In the large volume limit (ψ → ∞) the propagators S ψψ ∼ ψ 2 , S ψ ∼ ψ and S ∼ const and
therefore all Fg go to const.
    The genus zero and one have already been discussed in [7][19] respectively. So we
consider the genus 2 for which the techniques developed in this paper is crucial. The genus
two partition function is given by equation (6.7)
                                                     
                   1 ψψ 1        1 1 ψψ 1 1 ψψ ψψ
           F2 =      S Cψψ + Cψ S Cψ − S S Cψψψψ + ... + f (ψ) ,
                   2             2             8

where f (ψ) is holomorphic ambiguity. The most general form of holomorphic ambiguity
consistent with the asymptotic behavior of Fg is given as follows

                                              B         C
                            f2 (ψ) = A +           +            .                        (7.5)
                                           (1 − ψ ) (1 − ψ 5 )2
                                                 5


    Now we are almost done. We just need to transform F2 to canonical coordinate t and
canonical section for the bundle. Note that F2 is a section of a line bundle L−2 . Taking
into account the change in the gauge in going to canonical coordinates we obtain F2
                                               3               !2
                                          2πi
                         F2 (ψ) −→                   ̟0 (ψ(t))        F2 (ψ(t))          (7.6)
                                           5

Note that the ambiguities in the choice of the sections f and v given by two coefficients
a and b should simply shift F2 by a holomorphic function and thus should be possible
to absorb in A, B and C. That this should be possible leads to a strong check both for
the Feynman graph techniques discussed in section 6 in solving the Fg , as well as for the
computer code we wrote. So we set a = b = 0 and we are thus left to fix the three unknown
coefficients A, B and C.
    To do this we need to know the structure of instanton expansion. First of all there are
no genuine genus two curves of degree 1, 2 and 3. The contribution of degree 1, 2 and 3
comes entirely from the bubbling of the sphere or a torus (in case of degree 3). We take into
account these bubblings and demand that the denominators of coefficients of such terms can
at most be 1/5760 consistent with some characteristic class computation on moduli space
of genus 2. Now it is natural to expect that after subtraction of these contributions the rest
of the expansion be with integral coefficients as would follow from ‘counting’ holomorphic
curves. Of course there is no guarantee that this is correct to impose, because indeed
there are continuous families of holomorphic curves and we are computing the appropriate
Euler character as discussed in section 5, and these could be fractional if the corresponding

                                                115
moduli space has orbifold points. Anyhow to proceed we assume that at least in the case of
the quintic these coefficients are integral and we end up uniquely fixing all the coefficients.
We obtain A = −71375/288, B = −10375/288, C = 625/48, and get
                                              ∞
                                  5   1 X dn q n        X
                      F2 (q) = −    +            n  2
                                                      +   Dr q r ,                         (7.7)
                                 144 240 n (1 − q )     r

where dn counts the number of holomorphic rational curves of degree n, Dn the number
of holomorphic curves of genus 2. We found that there is no toroidal bubbling, which can
also be argued on physical grounds38 . In the above search we did not impose by hand the
large volume behavior t, t → ∞ computed in section 5. Indeed it was shown there that
the leading term should be χ(M )/5760 which in our case is −5/144 in agreement with
what we found, thus lending further support to the assumptions we made in fixing the
coefficients of bubbling. Moreover the number 1/240 is also very natural as it is minus
the Euler character of moduli space of genus 2 curves. It would be very interesting to
understand this. Also the structure of the multi-bubbling is very simple, though different
from what has been encountered in genus 0 [7] and 1 [19]. It would also be important to
derive this structure. At any rate the results of this computation for Dn are summarized
in table 1.




 38
      If there were toroidal bubbling then we would end up with a moduli space which has as
a factor a torus. However, since we have to bring down factors of curvature from the action to
absorb the fermion zero modes, and since the curvature vanishes for the torus, we just get zero.

                                              116
Degree                                g=0                                       g=1
    n=0                                   5                            50/12
    n=1                                2875                                0
    n=2                             609250                                 0
    n=3                          317206375                           609250
    n=4                      242467530000                       3721431625
    n=5                 229305888887625                     12129909700200
    n=6              248249742118022000                  31147299732677250
    n=7           295091050570845659250               71578406022880761750
    n=8        375632160937476603550000           154990541752957846986500
    n=9     503840510416985243645106250        324064464310279585656399500
      ...                                ...                              ...
large n             a0 n−3 (log n)−2 e2πnα                     a1 n−1 e2πnα
Degree                                g=2                                            g
    n=0                             -5/144                              -100 · [c3g−1 ]
    n=1                                  0
    n=2                                  0
    n=3                                  0
    n=4                            534750
    n=5                      75478987900
    n=6                 871708139638250
    n=7             5185462556617269625
    n=8         90067364252423675345000
    n=9     325859687147358266010240500
      ...                               ...                                         ...
                                   2 2πnα                  2g−3             2g−2 2πnα
large n                 a2 n(log n) e               ag n          (log n)      e

            Table 1. # curves of genus g on quintic hypersurface




                                      117
      As we have just seen the knowledge of the instanton expansion allows us to fix holo-
morphic ambiguity. Holomorphic ambiguity at genus g can be written as follows

                                                2g−2
                                                X        Ag
                                  fg (ψ) =
                                                g=0
                                                    (1 − ψ 5 )2g−2

In general there are 2g − 1 unknown parameters. To fix this ambiguity uniquely one need
to know the precise structure of the instanton expansion. What is lacking in particular is
how the lower genera contribute to genus g (bubbling). Even if this is fixed, to completely
fix the Ag we need to know the first few coefficients for the number of holomorphic curves
of genus g to fix all the rest.
      The asymptotic behavior of Dn (g) (i.e. the coefficient of asymptotic expansion for
large n and fixed g) is determined by the structure of singularity around ψ = 1. As was
argued the asymptotic behavior of Fg as ψ → 1 is given by

                                                                3            !2g−2
                                    A2g−2                  2πi
                        Fg (t) →                                      ̟0 (ψ)
                                 (1 − ψ 5 )2g−2             5

The last factor ((2πi/5)3 ̟0 )2g−2 is nothing else but the gauge transformation. In the limit
ψ → 1 this factor tends to a constant and therefore it does not affect the asymptotic behav-
ior. On the other hand the structure of singularity around ψ = 1 is dictated by asymptotic
behavior of Dn (g) coefficients. Assuming the reasonable ansatz Dn (g) ∼ nρ (log n)σ e2πnt(1)
we immediately get39
                                      Z
                          Fg (ψ) ∼        dn nρ (log n)σ e−2πn(t(ψ)−t(1)) ∼
                                               ρ+1
                                           1                            σ−ρ−1
                                  ∼                    [log(ψ − 1)]
                                          ψ−1

Comparing the last two formulas we obtain ρ = 2g −3 and σ = 2g −2. Thus the asymptotic
behavior of Dn (g) is given as follows

                              Dn (g) = ag n2g−3 (log n)2g−2 e2πnα ,                     (7.8)

where ag and α = t(1) are constants which are not universal in the sense that they
depend on the manifold under consideration. Morally speaking the degree of the map
 39
      The contribution from lower genera is subleading for ψ → 1.

                                                  118
n coincides with the notion of the area of the embedding measured in some units. In
this interpretation Dn is nothing else but a fixed area partition function. Asymptotic
dependence (7.8) of Dn (g) on the degree of the map is the same as the area dependence
for c = 1 model coupled to gravity. It even reproduces correctly the logarithmic scaling
violation[49], which is specific for the c = 1 model. This fact is not very surprising; ĉ = 3
N = 2 topological models are closely related to c = 1 model coupled to gravity. In fact it
has been shown that a particular ĉ = 3 twisted N = 2 theory is equivalent to c = 1 model
coupled to gravity [50]. To see the logarithmic scaling violation, consider Fg as a function
of cosmological constant ∆ which can be identified with 2π(t − α). For large areas (n) one
can replace the summation by integral
                         Z                                     2−2g
                                2g−3         2g−2 −n∆       ∆
                 Fg (∆) ∼ dn n       (log n)     e    ∼               ,
                                                          log ∆
The real scaling behavior is determined not by ∆ but by µ = ∆/ log ∆ exactly like in
c = 1 model. The ∆ dependence of Fg coincides with t-dependence (up to irrelevant shift
and rescaling). Then the logarithmic scaling violation is entirely due to the structure of
canonical map around ψ = 1. Indeed, (ψ −1) ∼ (t−α)/ log(ψ −1) ∼ (t−α)/ log(t−α) ∼ µ
around ψ = 1 (where t here is the canonical coordinate defined for t → ∞).
     In cases where there are more than one Kähler moduli, fix a direction in the Kähler
cone of H 1,1 (M, Z). Let us denote this direction by (n1 , ..., nr ) where ni are integers. For
large n the asymptotic behavior for Dn·(n1 ,...,nr ) (g) for fixed (n1 , ..., nr ) is thus expected to
be given by the expression (7.8). The exact values ag and α clearly depend on M and the
direction chosen in H 1,1 , while the powers 2g − 3 and 2g − 2 are expected to be universal.
It would be important to check this conjecture in full generality.

7.3. Other examples of Calabi-Yau models

     Here we briefly describe the results of genus two calculations for some other Calabi-
Yau models. Let us first consider some hypersurfaces in projective spaces. These Calabi–
Yau spaces are described as the vanishing locus of a quasihomogeneous polynomial which
describes (up to deformation) the embedding of Calabi–Yau 3–fold in a weighted projective
space
                    k=5 :             W0 = z05 + z15 + z25 + z35 + z45 = 0
                    k=6 :             W0 = 2z03 + z16 + z26 + z36 + z46 = 0
                                                                                                (7.9)
                    k=8 :             W0 = 4z02 + z18 + z28 + z38 + z48 = 0
                     k = 10 :         W0 = 5z02 + 2z15 + z210 + z310 + z410 = 0

                                                 119
These models were earlier investigated in connection with g = 0 holomorphic maps in [51]

[52]. The higher genus computations for these models are parallel to the quintic case.

The most general holomorphic ambiguity consistent with asymptotic behavior is given by

(7.5)(with 5 replaced by k). Again to fix the ambiguity we must know some additional

data (the large volume behavior of genus two partition function fixes only A). In case of

the quintic we knew that there are no genuine genus two curves of degree 1, 2 and 3. Now

there is no such information available. It is known that there are families of genus two

curves of degree 1 and 2 for cases k = 6 and k = 8. There are no a reasons to believe that

their contribution to genus two partition function is zero. We denote their contributions

by N and M respectively.

    As in the quintic case the genus two partition function has the structure

                                            ∞
                              χ(M )    1 X dn q n         X
                     F2 (q) =       +                   +   Dr q r .
                              5760    240 n (1 − q n )2   r



The coefficient 1/240 in front of the spherical bubbling is universal and independent of the

model. We found that after subtraction the genus zero contribution (bubbling) F̃2 (q) =
            P
χ(M )/5760 + r Dr q r has almost the integral expansion, except for k = 6 model. The

results of calculations are summarized in the following q-expansions

                           17
               F̃2k=6 (q) = −  + N q + M q2 +
                          480
             + (14735432142 + 18504 M − 97465842 N ) q 3+
                                                               
                 512439449683401
             +                   + 239228316 M − 1652255019168 N q 4 +
                        2
                                                                                     (7.10)
             + (3199366969602589296 + 2654549098512 M −
                                 − 20399446637531235 N )q 5 +
             + (34720817411136316872780 + 27042685856051310 M −
                                 − 219919127006205233856 N )q 6 + · · ·

                                            120
for k = 6 model,

                      37
          F̃2k=8 (q) = − + N q + M q2+
                     720
        + (2297430758208 + 102816 M − 2982239872 N ) q 3 +
        + (222468094578584808 + 7410413536 M − 282015713196032 N ) q 4 +
        + (15516453237414083197120 + 459069253511168 M −                               (7.11)

                               − 19447231842568395440 N ) q 5+
        + (941762378252908894389530784 − 26129248919673002880 M −
                              − 1171714563944600408125440 N ) q 6 + · · ·

for k = 8 and
                  1
     F̃2k=10 (q) = −+ N q + M q2 +
                 20
   + (2869664890712800 + 1271200 M − 447052624000 N ) q 3+
   + (3508008133715103890200 + 1143497004000 M −
                       − 529021878501120000 N ) q 4+
                                                                                       (7.12)
   + (3098620653232515436678572256 + 887703919048960000 M −
                   − 457872639654043275150000 N ) q 5+
   + (2385179845759540102344438070862400 + 634572439637621668400000 M −
                − 346846888907287393959739633664 N ) q 6 + · · ·

for k = 10. In fact we checked that all coefficients are integer up to q 10 , except for the
coefficient q 4 in k = 6 model (provided that N and M integers). This in particular suggests
that there must be continuous families of holomorphic maps in this case where they have
at least Z2 orbifold points, and they contribute a 1/2 to the coefficient of q 4 . It would be
interesting to verify this.
    Another example which is amusing is the Z3 orbifold which is obtained by modding
out T 2 × T 2 × T 2 by a diagonal (ω, ω, ω). In this case explicit computation of F1 shows
that it is zero. Now the anomaly formula for F2 implies that F2 is purely holomorphic, and
indeed this is exactly zero as can be seen by a direct computation of the orbifold model
at all g. This in particular means that even though there was room for Fg to be non-zero
consistent with the anomaly equation, as there are appropriate holomorphic functions,
nevertheless it vanishes.

                                             121
    There are other interesting models that one may wish to consider. A particularly
interesting class is where there are no marginal operators in the twisted theory. This can
happen, for example, in the context of B–models for Calabi–Yau which are rigid. In such
cases the Fg is simply a number (up to multiplication by the string coupling constant
λ2g−2 ), and summing over all g will lead to a function F (λ). This may be an easier case to
study. In particular since there are no marginal directions, there are no anomalies either.
A simple realization of this type of model is again given by the Z3 × Z3 orbifold model
discussed in this section, but with the B–twist instead of the A–twist. The Z3 orbifold in
the B–twist is also rigid but in this case one can show again by explicit computation that
Fg = 0.
    Note that in the A–model twisting and for smooth manifolds, we can compute Fg for all
g up to exponentially small corrections, in the limit of large volume, as Fg → 21 χ(M )[c3g−1 ],
in terms of some cohomology computation on the moduli of Riemann surfaces. In particular
if χ(M ) 6= 0 (and barring an accidental zero of [c3g−1 ]) we see that Fg 6= 0. It would be
interesting in this connection to study Calabi–Yau manifolds with χ = 0, as this argument
also shows that Fg = 0 up to exponentially small terms in the large volume limit.




                                              122
8. Physical implications of topological amplitudes

     One of the main motivations to study N = 2 SCFT’s comes from the fact that they
serve as building blocks for string vacua. In this connection particular objects which
have natural interpretations for the N = 2 SCFT’s turn out to also have some interesting
phenomenological implications in string models. One such object is the Yukawa coupling. If
one considers heterotic strings compactified on a Calabi–Yau 3–fold, with gauge connection
identified with the spin connection of Calabi–Yau, then the chiral primary fields of charge
1 give rise to massless generations and the chiral ring coefficients Cijk give the Yukawa
couplings between the different generations. Given the fact that Yukawa couplings are
simply the three point function of topological gravity, it is natural to expect that all the
other computations of twisted N = 2 theories coupled to gravity also have similar physical
significance for an appropriate string theory. In particular we would like to discuss the
significance of Fg in connection with standard string theories. Before we discuss this let us
note where we could look for such contributions in the effective field theories arising from
string theory.
     Let us note that the massless fields ti (xµ ) in general end up as lowest component of
chiral superfields from the spacetime point of view. In general in supersymmetric theories
we can have F-terms, i.e., superpotential terms, which involve only chiral superfields, i.e.
are holomorphic functions in ti . Now morally we expect Fg to be a holomorphic function
of ti (ignoring the holomorphic anomaly) and so we expect that Fg is a contribution to a
superpotential. This observation, together with the fact that Fg is a section of a particular
bundle essentially fixes what term we get in the effective Lagrangian. However instead
of guessing we will show this more directly below. So before we proceed further, the
dictionary we expect is


                 Topological Computations ↔ F − terms in field theories.


We will discuss both the case of closed and open strings. Afterwards we consider the
computation of threshold corrections for heterotic strings at one-loop and its relation to
F1 and Ray–Singer torsion. The case of the closed string has also been recently discussed
in detail by [53].

                                            123
8.1. Type II string Interpretation

    We start by asking which string theory Fg should be related with? Given the fact
that it is left–right symmetric, and it is related to the twisting of a supersymmetric sigma–
model for closed string theory, one is naturally led to consider type II strings compactified
from 10 to 4 on a ĉ = 3 internal theory. We thus are searching for low energy effective field
theory terms that Fg is computing. Compactifying type II on ĉ = 3 theory gives rise to
a low energy field theory in four dimensions with N = 2 supergravity. The chiral fields ti
are scalar fields for this supergravity (for aspects of N = 2 supergravities that one obtains
by compactifying on Calabi-Yau manifolds see [54]). The N = 2 supergravity multiplet in
particular contains a Maxwell field which is called gravi–photon. We will denote the field
strength for this field by T . This field arises from the Ramond–Ramond sector of type II
string and the vertex operator for this field, in the limit of vanishing momentum k → 0 is
proportional to
                                                   ±
                                VT±± = k±± S ± S σσe(−φ/2)

where φ is part of the the bosonized β, γ field [55] and where S (S) denote the left–moving
(right-moving) 4d spinor vertex operators and σ (σ) denotes the unique vertex operator for
the left–moving (right–moving) charge 3/2 (3/2) Ramond vacuum state for the internal
N = 2 theory (with ĉ = 3). Indeed this vertex operator is the same as the FMS [55]
spin operator (taking into account the fact that the internal theory is a general ĉ = 3
rather than flat space). Note that σ, S and exp(−φ/2) (together with their right–moving
counterparts) generate the spectral flow from the N S sector to the R sector. We will use
this vertex operator to go between the twisted theory and the untwisted theory.
    There are a number of differences between the twisted theory and the ordinary type II
strings. First of all there are more fields in the ordinary theory. In addition to an untwisted
N = 2 SCFT with ĉ = 3, in type II strings we have the fermionic diffeomorphism ghosts
(b, c) of spin (2, −1), the bosonic super–diffeomorphism ghosts (β, γ) of spin (3/2, −1/2),
and the space–time fields, which we take to be two complex bosons X i of spin 0 and two
complex fermions ψ i and their conjugates χi of spin 1/2 with i = 1, 2. Of course the same
content of fields is needed for the right-moving part which we denote by barred fields. If we
could twist the 1/2 integral spin fields by half a unit, then their spins would be the same as
the integral spin fields but with opposite statistics, so they would tend to cancel out of the
partition function. In addition we would need to twist the internal N = 2 theory which
is also the same as shifting the 1/2-integral fermion spins of the internal theory. Both of

                                             124
these can be accomplished by insertion of (2g − 2) vertex operators for gravi-photon VT++
(modulo some subtleties mentioned below). The way to see this is that the spin content
of fields can be changed by addition to the action of
                                                 Z
                                             1
                                                     Rϕ                                (8.1)
                                             2
where ϕ denotes the bosonized version of the fields. We can choose the curvature R to
have delta–function like support at 2g − 2 points. But each such point is equivalent to the
insertion of VT++ as mentioned before. However, to write it in a conformally meaningful
way, given that VT++ is dimension (1, 1) we have to integrate it over the surface (which is
equivalent to choosing the delta-function support for R by averaging over all points); we
thus have found the dictionary that
                         hZ       i2g−2
                             VT++       · · · untwisted = h· · ·itwisted               (8.2)

This means that the determinant of non-zero modes of the extra fields which were not in
the original twisted internal N = 2 theory cancel out, leaving us with the twisted internal
theory. However, we have to pay particular attention to the zero modes of the extra fields
we have introduced: There are zero modes for b, β and the ψ, χ system that have to be
absorbed in order for the partition function not to vanish. Let us first deal with the ghost
zero modes.
     The b zero modes give rise to the measure over moduli space. In fact if µi denote the
basis for Beltrami-differentials, we have to insert in the superstring measure a factor of
                                                                2
                                       b(µ1 ) . . . b(µ3g−3 )

to absorb the b zero modes. For the β zero modes we usually have to insert 2g − 2
factors of δ(β) · G where G is the N = 2 supersymmetry current for the full theory. But
that is true for the partition function with no operators inserted. In our case inserting
2g − 2 vertex operators VT++ which are in the −1/2 picture means that we need to insert
3g − 3 factors of δ(β). Moreover the fact that β, γ is effectively twisted means that we can
choose the same basis for the Beltrami differentials to fold with them. Moreover by charge
conservation for the internal twisted theory only the G− component of the internal theory
gives non-vanishing amplitude, so we end up with
                                               2
                      δ β(µ1 ) · · · δ β(µ3g−3 ) |G− (µ1 ) · · · G− (µ3g−3 )|2

                                                 125
With this choice of Beltrami-differential, the zero modes of b and δ(β) give opposite con-
tribution and thus b, c and β, γ completely drop out of the picture, having left us with the
twisted N = 2 theory with 3g − 3 insertions of G− which is precisely the prescription we
had for computing Fg of the twisted string coupled to gravity. However we still have to
get rid of the space–time fermion zero modes. There are g of ψ i (which has spin 1) and
one of χi (which has spin zero) zero mode for each i (and similarly for the right movers).
To absorb the χ zero mode and one ψ zero mode we can insert the operator
                                              Z          Z
                                                     i′           j′
                       ǫij ǫi′ j ′ ǫij ǫi′ j ′ ψ χi ψ χi′ ψ j χj ψ χj ′
                                                i
                                                                                                                (8.3)

Note that up to factors of momentum, this operator is precisely the insertion of two
graviton vertex operators. We are left to absorb g − 1 extra zero modes of ψ i . Taking into
account that after twisting ψ i has spin 1, one is tempted to introduce g − 1 operators of
         R     j
the form ψ i ψ but unfortunately this does not have a well-defined meaning as a vertex
operator for the untwisted theory. Instead, motivated by a suggestion from authors of [53],
                                                          1     2
we can make the insertion of g − 1 of ψ 1 ψ 2 ψ ψ operators at g − 1 of the points where we
have taken the delta–function curvature singularity. This choice will have the property of
absorbing the unwanted ψ zero modes, without getting an operator which does not make
sense in the untwisted theory. This is because choosing this position for the g −1 curvature
singularities will convert g − 1 of VT++ to VT−− which is the vertex for gravi–photon field
with opposite self–duality property. In this way we can absorb all the zero modes and end
up with Fg . We thus see, putting all this together, that
            hZ          ig−1 h Z          ig−1                            Z
                                                                                   i′
                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                       j′
     Fg =        VT++              VT−−          ǫij ǫ
                                                     i′ j ′   ǫij ǫi j
                                                                    ′ ′
                                                                               i
                                                                              ψ χi ψ χi ′       ψ j χj ψ χj ′   (8.4)

Putting the momentum factors this means that Fg is the coefficient in the low energy
effective action for a term of the form R2 (T 2 )g−1 . This completes the derivation of relation
between topological partition function and field theory. However we should note that in
the above derivation we were somewhat careless in some points: We assumed that we
                                    R
can twist fields simply by adding 21 Rϕ term to the action, but as is well known this is
true up to boundary terms. The boundary terms are in fact responsible for picking which
point on the Jacobian of the twisted field we end up (i.e. the choice of the flat bundle)
— we have to make sure that we end up with the trivial flat bundle tensored with the
appropriate power of the canonical bundle. Secondly, a point which is related to this, is
the fact that we have to sum over spin structures in the untwisted theory. Somehow this

                                                         126
is already taken into account in the twisting, because viewing the twisting as choosing a
background gauge field set equal to half the gauge connection is ambiguous up to a choice
of a Z2 bundle, which is just the choice of spin structure. This ambiguity should translate
to a sum over spin structure to get a correspondence between the twisted and untwisted
theory. To make sure that these points do not affect our argument one will have to go to
more detail and check the explicit factors arising in the twisting. Fortunately this has been
considered very carefully in [53] using bosonization techniques which confirms the above
heuristic arguments.
      As argued at the beginning of this section we should expect a term in the superpo-
tential which give rise to the effective action of the form R2 (T 2 )g−1 . In fact one can find
an F -term which gives rise to such a term:

                                               [Fg (W 2 )g ]F                               (8.5)

where W 2 is the square of the Weyl superfield (W 2 is a composite chiral superfield of
weight 2), and [· · ·]F is the F –density for conformal N = 2 supergravity. Notice that
this coupling makes sense since, Fg is a section40 of L2−2g , which — in the language of
conformal N = 2 tensor calculus [14] — means that it is a chiral field of weight 2 − 2g, so
that the combination Fg (W 2 )g has weight 2 and hence defines an invariant F –term [14].
      However, eq.(8.5) makes sense only if Fg is a chiral superfield, which happens only
if Fg is a holomorphic function of the chiral fields ti . But as discussed in section 3, Fg
is not holomorphic because of anomalies. Then (8.5) cannot be the correct form of the
supergravity coupling corresponding to the amplitudes we discussed above. However we
have to recall how one deals with a field theory which has flat directions, as is the case
here. In such cases there are inequivalent vacua determined by what the expectation value
of the massless fields are. Suppose we have chosen such an expectation value, which we
denote by (t0 , t0 ). Then we can expand Fg holomorphically about this base point. What
this means is that we consider (in canonical coordinates)
                                           X 1
                     Fg (x + t0 , t0 ) =            xi1 ...xin Di1 ...Din Fg (t0 , t0 ) =
                                           i
                                               n!

 40
      In more traditional terms, Fg is represented in superspace by a homogeneous function of the
vector fields XI of weight 2 − 2g. The Fg we use throughout the paper is obtained from this
homogeneous function by choosing a gauge for the line bundle L.

                                                     127
                                   X 1
                               =            xi1 ...xin ∂i1 ...∂in Fg (t0 , t0 ).
                                   i
                                       n!

Thus Fg is now a holomorphic function of superfields xi , and we are thinking of (t0 , t0 ) as
a base point for expansion of Fg and not as a superfield. This view of the effective La-
grangian we are presenting is motivated from the fact that in the construction of solutions
to the anomaly equation, discussed in section 5, a function W was introduced which was
a holomorphic function of xi . So in particular we end up with the superpotential for the
N = 2 supergravity, including all loop contributions:
                X
                     [Fg (x + t0 , t0 )W 2 (λ W 2 )g−1 ]F = [W 2 W (λW, x; t0 , t0 )]F   (8.6)
                 g


where here λ−1 is a section of L−1 and plays the role of compensating field in the super-
gravity theory [14] (one–loop contribution can also be included here by addition of a term
proportional to log λW).

8.2. Open superstring interpretation

    As discussed in the previous section, we can also consider the twisted N = 2 theory
for the open strings. It is also natural to ask what is the interpretation of the Fhg in the
low energy effective theory of some superstring theory. The natural superstring theory to
look for in this context is the 10-dimensional open superstrings compactified on an internal
N = 2 SCFT with ĉ = 3. This theory gives rise to a 4-dimensional low energy theory of
N = 1 supersymmetric Yang-Mills coupled to supergravity. Actually as is well known to
get a consistent theory we need to consider unoriented strings. Also if we wish to avoid
anomalies we need to take the gauge group O(32) which brings us to one of the most
interesting superstring theories. Our considerations in the following will also apply to the
more general gauge group of O(N ).
    Unoriented strings will have worldsheets which include both orientable and non-
orientable surfaces. Let us concentrate on the contribution from orientable surfaces which
we have discussed for the twisted N = 2 theories. To simplify further let us first consider
the case with no handles g = 0 with h boundaries. We will use the same idea as in the
closed string case, in other words add the extra fields which are present in the superstring
compared to the N = 2 twisted topological model, and then put appropriate insertions
to twist the 21 -integral spin fields to obtain integral fields which cancel among each other
except for zero modes, which have to be checked separately. The field analogous to the

                                                     128
graviphoton in the open string case is the gaugino field, which we denote by the vertex
operator VΨ± , at zero momentum. This operator is the spectral flow operator in the inter-
nal N = 2 SCFT, combined with the operator which twists the spins of β, γ ghosts and
space-time fermionic fields ψ, χ. In particular this operator is inserted where we choose
curvature singularities of appropriate strength.
    Let us consider the open string worldsheet shown in Fig. 19.

                                                              -
                                                          VΨ
                                                    S1             -
                                                                  VΨ
                              S                           +
                                                         VΨ
                                            -                     S2
                                           VΨ
                             VF                                    +
                                                                  VΨ
                                                    S3
                                                +
                              VF            VΨ


         Fig. 19: The worldsheet for open strings with g = 0 and h = 5 bound-
         aries, two of which are the two boundaries of the cylinder and three
         of them (S1 , S2 , S3 ) are slits on the cylinder. The twisted theory cor-
         responds to putting gaugino vertex operators VΨ on the end points of
         the slits and gauge field vertex operators VF on the boundary of the
         cylinder.

    This is a cylinder with two boundaries and with h−2 slits cut on it. We also mean this
geometrically, i.e., that the metric be the flat metric on the cylinder. However, note that
this introduces curvature singularities at the two end points of each of the h − 2 slits. The
reason for this is that the zero curvature on the boundary corresponds to π radians, but
here at the two end points we get 2π radians of worldsheet. So we insert VΨ+ operators at
each of the two end points of the (h−2) slits. This takes care of the twisting of the internal
theory; the ghost zero modes also cancel leaving us with the measure for the twisted N = 2
theory coupled to gravity. So we only need to consider the space-time fermion zero modes.
There are h − 1 zero modes for each of the two ψ i and 1 zero mode for each of the χi . The
χi zero modes can be absorbed by adding the operator
                                     I        I
                                 il
                                ǫ ǫjk χi ψ  j
                                                χl ψ k

Each of these is the vertex operator of a gauge field VF (up to momentum factors) at zero
momentum. Again as in the closed string case we need to absorb the remaining h − 2 zero

                                             129
modes for each of the ψ i . Again, this can be done in a conformally meaningful way only
by including them at one of the two end points of each of the h − 2 slits converting h − 2
of the VΨ+ operators to VΨ− operators. This will thus conclude absorbing zero modes, and
so we end up with
                                I          I               I        I
                     Fh0 = h[        VΨ+        VΨ− ]h−2       VF           VF iuntwisted
                                Si         Si              S            S


where Si denote the interior slits and the S denotes one of the two boundaries of the
cylinder. Thus we see, taking into account the structure of the insertions at the boundaries
in taking the trace, that this gives rise to a term in the effective lagrangian of the form


                                       Fh0 · Tr F 2 [Tr Ψ2 ]h−2 .


The non–orientable worldsheets do not contribute to this amplitude because the absorption
of fermion zero modes does not have the right structure.
    As discussed in the introduction we expect that the topological theory is computing
the coefficient of a a superpotential term. Indeed there is a superpotential term which give
rise to the above interaction and that is given by
                                      Z
                                           d2 θFh0 (Wα W α )h−1 .                           (8.7)


As discussed in the previous section, the partition function Fh0 is now going to be a section
of L2−h . This is consistent with the fact that W 2 is a section of L (which is also related
to the fact that closed string coupling is the square of the open string coupling constant).
The discussion we had regarding the non–holomorphicity of Fg in the closed string case
applies word for word in the present situation and we will thus not repeat it.
    The appearance of (8.7) as a topological amplitude, which is in principle exactly com-
putable possibly using anomaly techniques discussed for open strings, is very interesting.
This is because such an interaction has a strong bearing on the question of gaugino con-
densates, which has been proposed [56] as a mechanism to break supersymmetry in the
context of superstrings! This would be very interesting to pursue in detail. Also the
heterotic version of this would have to be investigated [57].

                                                    130
8.3. Threshold corrections for heterotic strings

    In the context of heterotic strings the one–loop contribution to threshold correction
for gauge coupling is related to the topological amplitude we have been discussing. In
fact it has been shown in [58] that the one–loop corrected gauge coupling constant which
depends on the moduli of the internal theory can be written as

                          16π 2        16π 2              2
                                                         MGUT
                                  = k a 2    + b a · log      + ∆a                      (8.8)
                          ga2 (µ)      gGUT               µ2

where a denotes the gauge group in question, ka is the level of the group, ba denotes the
contribution of massless modes to the threshold, and ∆a which includes contribution of
internal stringy states is given by
                                  Z
                                      d2 τ ′
                           ∆a =           Tr (−1)FL FL Q2a q HL q HR                    (8.9)
                                       τ2

where the trace is in the R-R sector and is over the massive modes of the internal theory,
including the right–moving gauge group contribution and the four dimensional modes, Qa
denotes a gauge group generator for the group a, and the integral is over fundamental
domain of moduli of tori. The ba in the above formula reflects the fact that the zero modes
lead to a divergence in the above formula which can be removed by defining a running
scale µ, and so

                            ba = T r(−1)FL FL Q2a
                                                    massless modes

It was shown [58] that ∆a satisfies an anomaly equation in terms of its dependence on
moduli of the internal theory. Moreover it was shown that in the case of identifying gauge
connection with the spin connection of the Calabi-Yau, which breaks E8 × E8 heterotic
string to E6 × E8 , ∆(E6 ) − ∆(E8 ) satisfies the same anomaly equation as 12 · F1 , where F1
is the genus one topological partition function defined in section 2. It would be interesting
to show this fact directly and moreover show that they also have the same holomorphic
piece, i.e. not only ∂∂[∆(E6 ) − ∆(E8 )] = 12∂∂F1 , but that ∆(E6 ) − ∆(E8 ) = 12F1 .
    In order to argue this, it is worthwhile deriving the more general formula for the
behavior of ∆a even if the internal theory is not (2, 2), i.e. when the gauge connection is
not identified with the spin connection of the Calabi–Yau but belongs to some bundle V .
The bundle V needs to be stable and 12 c2 (V ) = 12 c2 (M ) for a consistent heterotic string
vacuum [59]. To be able to relate ∆a to what we have computed and in particular to the

                                              131
Ray–Singer torsion, in this generality, we need to take a particular limit, namely the limit
of large volume of the Calabi–Yau. We will compute the dependence of ∆a on the complex
moduli of Calabi–Yau in this limit. Actually taking the large volume limit in the case
V = T (M ) is not a restriction as is well known that the complex structure dependence
and Kähler structure dependence of ∆a decouple in this case. So for this case our remarks
are quite general. We suspect our answer are also independent of this limit in the more
general case but we do not have a rigorous argument.
    Let us consider the internal theory to be a Calabi–Yau manifold with a vector bundle
V on it. Let H denote the holonomy of this bundle. This means that the first E8 gets
broken down to
                                        E8 → G × H

where G is the maximal remaining group for which G × H can be imbedded in E8 . We will
for simplicity of notation take G to be a simple Lie group, otherwise we can do what we are
about to do for each simple factor of G. Thus the unbroken gauge group in 4 dimensions
is G × E8 . Now the adjoint representation of E8 breaks under this decomposition to
                                              X
                                   (248) →          (Rα , rα )
                                               α

where Rα (rα ) denotes the G (H) representation.
    Now consider the limit of infinite volume on the Calabi–Yau with arbitrary complex
structure. In this limit the computation of ∆a is easy to do, because by adapting the
argument used in the derivation of the Kodaira–Spencer theory to the present case, the
interior part of the moduli space make no contribution to the answer, and only degenerate
Riemann surfaces contribute. In the case of moduli of torus, this means that only τ2 → ∞
contributes, in which case (and after integrating over τ1 ) only the massless modes of
the right–moving sector contributes and the internal theory simply becomes the same
computation as the Ray–Singer torsion discussed in section 5.7. We thus see that
                                         X
                                ∆(G) =         T (Rα )I(Vrα )                        (8.10)
                                          α

where I(Vrα ) denotes the Ray-Singer torsion for the vector bundle V with representation
rα and T (Rα ) denotes the index of representation Rα (coming from Q2a ). Also note that
similarly for the unbroken E8 we have

                                    ∆(E8 ) = T (E8 )I0                               (8.11)

                                              132
where I0 denotes the Ray-Singer torsion with the trivial bundle. As discussed in [58] only
the difference between the threshold corrections is meaningful, and so physically we should
only consider ∆(G) − ∆(E8 ). This is our general result. Now we specialize to the case
where V = T (M ), in which case G = E6 . We have the decomposition
                            248 → (78, 1) ⊕ (27, 3) ⊕ (27, 3) ⊕ (1, 8)                (8.12)
Also we note that since the spin connection is identified with the gauge connection we have
                    I(V0 ) = I0     I(V3 ) = I(T ∗ )    I(V3 ) = I(T ∗ ∧ T ∗ )        (8.13)
Using the values T (E8 ) = 30, T (E6 ) = 12, T (27) = 3, and making use of (8.13), (8.12),
(8.10) and (8.11) we find
                                                                         
                ∆(E6 ) − ∆(E8 ) = (12 − 30)I0 + 3 I(T ∗ ) + I(T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ) =
                                      1          1             
                         = 6 − 3I0 + I(T ∗ ) + I(T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ) =
                                      2          2
                   −3       1         1               3                    
                =6     I0 + I(T ∗ ) + I(T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ) − I(T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ) =
                   2        2         2             2
                           12 X              3
                         =       (−1)p p −       I(∧p T ∗ ) = 12F1                    (8.14)
                           2 p               2
where we used the fact that I(T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ∧ T ∗ ) = I0 . This is what we wished to show. Even
though we derived this in the context of complex structure dependence of the threshold
corrections, by mirror transform, it may also be viewed as the Kähler structure dependence.
If we view it in this way we can then use the result of [19] to estimate the dependence of
F1 for large volume of Calabi-Yau. It was shown there that (taking into account the factor
of 2 difference in the definition of F1 )
                                             Z
                                           1k≫1
                                   F1 −→         k ∧ c2
                                          24 M
where k denotes the Kähler class of the Calabi-Yau manifold. Note that (as discussed in
     R
[19]) M k ∧ c2 > 0. So we have
                                                Z
                                              1
                           ∆(E6 ) − ∆(E8 ) =        k ∧ c2 > 0
                                              2 M
Now we can use (8.8) to see that the effect of changing k beyond the Planck scale is the
                    ef f ective
same as getting an MGUT         according to
                                                                R
                    ef f ective               ∆                      k ∧ c2
                 MGUT           = MGUT · exp( ) = MGUT · exp[ M             ]
                                             2b                      2b
where in this case b = 54 + 3(h1,1 + h1,2 ). We thus see that the effective grand unification
scale for this relatively general class of string compactifications is extremely sensitive to
the size of the internal manifold and moreover when we increase the size of the internal
manifold above Planck scale it tends to increase exponentially fast!

                                                  133
9. Open problems

      In this section we discuss open problems and directions for future research. Let us
first summarize some of the main results of this paper. We have considered N = 2 twisted
topological strings. The partition function of these theories at a given genus g is formally
a holomorphic modular function of weight 2g − 2 on moduli space of the conformal theory.
However we find that there is an anomaly and that the partition function is not necessarily
holomorphic. What goes wrong with the formal argument of holomorphicity is the assump-
tion that total derivative terms vanish upon integration over the moduli space of Riemann
surfaces. Using the geometry of moduli space of Riemann surfaces and the structure of the
N = 2 twisted theories one can compute the boundary contributions and they turn out to
be expressible as (products of) lower genus correlation functions. This can be summarized
as a second order linear differential equation, the master anomaly equation, for the full
partition function of the theory summed over all genera. This recursion relation for the
antiholomorphic dependence of the partition function can be solved by introducing Feyn-
man rules which can be expressed as an integral over an auxiliary space which includes the
dilaton and the marginal fields as propagating degrees of freedom and whose vertices are
the correlation functions of the lower genus and the propagators are made of a canonical 41
prepotential, for the anti-topological theory, and its derivatives. This fixes the genus g
partition function up to a holomorphic modular form, which are typically finite in number
and thus reduces the computation of the partition function to fixing the coefficients of
these functions. In concrete examples using mirror symmetry these coefficients can also
be fixed, at least for low genus.
      We discussed the realization of N = 2 SCFT’s in terms of sigma–models on Calabi–
Yau manifolds. There are two different ways to twist such theories, the A–twist (the
Kähler twist) or the B–twist (the complex twist). In the case of A–twist a particular
limit of the topological string theory computes the number of holomorphic maps (or an
appropriate Euler character on the moduli space of holomorphic maps) from the Riemann
surfaces to the Calabi–Yau. In the case of the B–twist the target space theory of the
topological theory may be described as an ordinary field theory, actually a topological
field theory, which quantizes the complex structures on Calabi–Yau, which we called the
Kodaira–Spencer theory of gravity.

 41
      Which is different from the ones previously used in the literature.

                                                134
    We also found an interpretation of the computations of the topological partition func-
tion Fg as the genus–g correction to four dimensional low energy lagrangian generating
superpotential terms that arise upon compactification of superstrings on internal theory
with ĉ = 3 from 10 to 4 dimensions. In the open string case this term will be relevant
for the gaugino condensates. Also we related F1 , the genus one partition function, to the
threshold corrections for gauge group couplings for heterotic strings in the ‘standard’ com-
pactification scenario (identifying the gauge connection with the spin connection of the
Calabi–Yau). This shows a surprisingly universal exponential dependence of the effective
GUT scale with respect to the volume of the Calabi–Yau manifold.
    This was a basic summary of some of the main results. Let us now discuss some
directions for future research. One of the most significant aspects of the master anomaly
equation is that it captures the anomaly to all orders in string perturbation theory and
is thus a way even to proceeds towards non–perturbative formulation of it. It would be
interesting to compare how the non-perturbative aspects of the topological strings discussed
here compare with those of some other string theories discussed in [60]. A first step in this
direction is to find exact solutions to the anomaly equation to all orders. In this paper
we saw how we can do it order by order in perturbation theory (using the Feynman graph
technique discussed in the text) but we did not manage to find a simple closed form for
any example which would be valid to all orders. The simplest example to consider in this
connection is the toroidal example discussed in section 7. One might well imagine that
a theta function like solution may exist to the master anomaly equation, though we were
not able to find one. The attempt is complicated by the fact that not only one wishes to
find a solution to the master equation, but a solution which satisfies the correct boundary
conditions (dictated by the genus–1 answer). Of course finding a solution to the master
anomaly equation, even if it satisfies the correct boundary condition is no guarantee to be
the correct amplitudes given by the string amplitudes, just because the anomaly equation
only captures the anti-holomorphic dependence of the partition function on the moduli.
One still has the freedom to correct it order by order by addition of holomorphic terms.
Indeed changing the holomorphic dependence at a given genus will affect even the non-
holomorphic dependence for any higher genus computation. Finding a nice way to fix the
holomorphic dependence, even though it just means fixing a finite number of coefficients
at each order, is a major challenge. The most logical way to proceed, in the case of the
B-model is to study the Kodaira–Spencer perturbation theory which naturally will also
give the holomorphic part as well as the anomalous part of the amplitudes. Otherwise

                                            135
we have rather limited resources to fix the holomorphic part of the amplitudes. Mirror
symmetry helps, as it did in the examples considered in section 7, in fixing some of the low
genus answers by relating it to counting holomorphic maps of genus g to a target space.
But even in these examples the attempt was complicated by the fact that for a given genus
g the lower genus holomorphic maps may contribute as a kind of degenerate contribution
to the genus g amplitude (which in the case of genus 0 contribution of degree one is called
the ‘bubbling’). A deeper understanding of these general bubbling phenomena would
be greatly helpful in fixing the holomorphic ambiguity of the solution to the anomaly
equation. The situation in understanding these contributions can significantly improve
through collaboration between algebraic geometers and physicists. Some discussions of
the bubbling phenomena appears in appendix A.
     One of the most mysterious aspects which emerged in the course of solving the anomaly
equation (see section 6) was the appearance of Feynman rules involving propagation of
massless modes and the dilaton. This was rather unexpected and needs to be understood
better. In a sense it seems to suggest that effectively we can add the massless modes as
dynamical fields to the string field theory despite the fact that we had to delete them in
order to write the string field action in section 5. In this interpretation putting back the
massless fields in the theory is effectively a way to restore background independence and
so would suggest that including the massless modes would simply lead to answers which
are independent of t, t thus explaining the Feynman graph rules we found for computing
Fg . In fact the propagator we have for the marginal fields, which is formally identified with
b0 b̄0 /L0 and is ill-defined 0/0 is effectively ‘regularized’ by the propagator S ij introduced in
section 6. In fact one can ‘formally’ derive the defining property of S ij from this definition
using a tt∗ -type argument. It would be interesting to develop this further as well as see how
the propagators involving the dilaton field will appear. At any rate demystification of the
Feynman rules that we found is a very important hint in progress in a better understanding
of these theories.
     Perhaps the most important aspect of the present work is the discovery of a new
topological gravity theory in six dimensions, the Kodaira–Spencer theory. It is topological
in the sense that it is independent of the metric of the Calabi–Yau manifold, though it
depends on the complex structure chosen. This topological theory is the target space
description of a topological worldsheet theory on a Calabi–Yau. The fact that there is a
string theory description of this theory makes us believe that the ultra-violet divergencies
of the KS theory are not a real obstacle to its existence and strings can be viewed as

                                               136
effectively giving a ‘nice regularization’ of the theory (deforming it from the manifold
space to the loop space). Nevertheless it should be interesting to regularize the KS theory
using the more standard regularization techniques of field theories. In particular it should
be possible to derive the holomorphic anomaly master equation directly in this field theory
set up for all loops. The one–loop version of the anomaly was checked explicitly to agree
with field theory one using the zeta function regularization techniques (which were used
in [38]).
     In more than one way the KS theory in 3 complex dimensions mirrors its cousin the
Chern–Simon theory in 3 real dimensions. It is a closed string version of Chern–Simon
theory. Thus just as one has interesting topological invariants in the Chern–Simon theory,
giving link invariants on three manifolds, one also expects the same here in the context
of invariants associated to Calabi–Yau 3–folds (or more abstractly classification question
of variation of Hodge structures which arise in superconformal theories). This aspect is
worth more thought. Also the open string version of strings on Calabi–Yau is a mirror to
ordinary Chern–Simon theory. So in this setup the coupling of this mirror theory to KS
theory is interesting to study. In particular the holomorphic anomalies in the open string
sector discussed in this paper should be the mirror transformed versions of (a certain limit
of) Chern-Simon theory’s anomalous dependence on the metric of the 3 manifold which
has been studied recently [61] to all loops. It would be interesting to work out the detail of
the anomaly equation for the open string case which, except for the one–loop case which
we computed in detail, we just briefly discussed in this paper. This is more urgent in
view of the fact that gaugino condensates which are believed to be a mechanism to break
supersymmetry in string theories will be strongly affected by such terms. This aspect of the
present work, which may have potential relevance in questions of phenomenology, i.e., the
fact that topological partition functions may also be viewed as particular computations in
certain string models compactified on the corresponding topological theory we find rather
significant. Not only topological theories can be used to compute some amplitudes in
ordinary strings, but the amplitudes that they compute are the most interesting ones to
compute, i.e. the superpotential terms. This opens the door to exact computations in
string theories using topological techniques. Amplitudes which are computable, at least
in the context of open superstrings, will be of interest also in connection with gaugino
condensates which has been proposed as a mechanism to break supersymmetry. In fact it
would be quite satisfactory that deep facts such as supersymmetry breaking be linked to
very natural topological computations. It would be nice to extend these computations to

                                             137
the heterotic case in view of the potential phenomenological implications. The fact that
heterotic strings morally should behave like the open strings suggests that even in this case
the topologically formulated heterotic string should compute similar superpotential terms,
as would be interesting in questions of gaugino condensates. At any rate it would be very
important to determine the consequences of such terms in the supersymmetry breaking
scenarios in string theory.
    The crucial link needed to establish topological theories with conventional superstring
computations was the observation that basically the twisting of an ordinary superstring is
equivalent to insertion of an appropriate number of FMS spin operators which twists the
field measure. Even though topological amplitudes correspond to very special amplitudes
in string theories it is natural to ask whether one can formulate arbitrary amplitudes in
superstring theories using the twisted topological models by inclusion of non–topological
operators (including conjugate FMS spin operators to untwist the measure). If such a
formulation can be done it would be a step forward in that one would not have to deal
with issues of summing over spin structures or the question of splitness of supermoduli
space, both of which are naturally absent in the topological theory because the spin of all
the fields are integral. In fact results of [62] suggest that this should be possible.
    Another aspect of the present work was the fact that in all the examples studied, the
large area behavior of the genus g partition function of the topological theory on a Calabi–
Yau 3–fold is in the same universality class as the c = 1 theory coupled to gravity (i.e. has
the same exponents). This result shows that the identification of the c = 1 theory coupled
to gravity with a particular supersymmetric coset representation of black hole with ĉ = 3
discovered in [50] which is a non-unitary N = 2 twisted model, is actually only the tip of
the iceberg. Indeed what we have found seems to strongly suggest that the universality
class of c = 1 strings is the same as that of topologically twisted ĉ = 3 theories. It would
be interesting to study this connection further. In particular for each Calabi–Yau manifold
M the large ‘worldsheet’ area A ≫ 1 behaviour should go like

                              ag (M ) A2g−3log2−2g (A) exp[b(M )A].

It would be interesting to compute ag (M ) for all g and for all Calabi–Yau manifolds (b(M )
can be computed from the genus zero result if one knows the mirror manifold). For a fixed g
how does the number ag (M ) depend on M ? Also for a fixed M how do the numbers ag (M )
depend on g? Do they satisfy recursion relations of the type encountered in topological
theory coupled to gravity?

                                              138
      There are even more connections with c = 1. Indeed as pointed out in [63] the target
space physics of c = 1 strings has the symmetry of volume preserving diffeomorphism. As
discussed in section 5 this is precisely the gauge symmetry of the Kodaira–Spencer theory
which is the target space physics of the critical topological strings. This relation is also
worth further investigation and is suggestive of the universal relation between c = 1 strings
and ĉ = 3 topologically twisted theories.
      The special status ĉ = 3 topological string enjoys among more general topologically
twisted theories, is very much analogous to the special status c = 1 strings enjoys among
all the theories with c ≤ 1 coupled to gravity. It is natural to ask if what we have been
discussing in connection with unitary ĉ = 3 twisted theories has any bearing on the more
general classes of possibly non–unitary theories (as is the case with the theory discussed
in [50]) or twisted theories with ĉ < 3 (as is the case for the minimal N = 2 twisted
theories which is related to the (1, p) theories coupled to gravity [22], [21]). The central
question is whether the anomaly equation should exist in these cases. In fact morally it
should be true but to make it precise a few technical obstacles should be overcome: In the
context of non–unitary theories one has to argue that the cohomology elements are the
only ones that contribute for long tubes (this is no longer guaranteed in the non-unitary
case). In the context of ĉ < 3 models one has to recall that in order to get non–zero
amplitudes one will have to perturb the corresponding conformal theory in two directions:
The massive direction, as well as turning on the gravitational (or topological) descendants.
Turning on relevant perturbations which makes the theory massive raises the question of
whether we can still integrate over conformally inequivalent classes of metric. Even if this
can be done, we will have to know the analog of Zamolodchikov metric for these massive
theories. One would imagine that the analog of tt∗ equations which is also known for
the massive [2] case should be relevant (in fact the results of [64] suggest that the one–
loop partition function should be related to the tau-function). However it is not completely
straightforward because as we discussed in section 2 the Zamolodchikov connection and tt∗
connection differ by a term involving the connection on the line bundle L. Unfortunately in
the massive case the line bundle L is not a holomorphic sub-bundle of the vacuum bundle
and so this prevents one from constructing canonical connections on it42 . This will have

 42
      In the context of integrable massive perturbations L is typically a sub-bundle because of
discrete symmetries and one can define the corresponding line bundle connection. It would be
interesting to study this particular class further.

                                                 139
to be better understood. Another direction of perturbation is turning on the gravitational
descendants (which are in particular needed for a non–vanishing amplitude at higher genus
for the twisted minimal models coupled to gravity). The correlations involving topological
descendants can typically be viewed as boundary contributions to the amplitudes [21].
Thus one would expect an interesting mixture with the anomaly discussed in this paper.
In this connection the Landau-Ginzburg formulation of the descendants may be particularly
useful [65].
      Typically string theories have infinitely many particles. However there are some cases
known where string theory has only a finite number of particles. Precisely in these cases
the string theory seems also to be related to topological theories both in the sense of world
sheet and in the sense of target theory. Let us summarize some of the known examples
and speculate on the relation between them.
      Let us summarize some of the most important known topological field theories: Apart
from the 6-dimensional one that we discovered in this paper, and its open string analog
[23], there are two important topological theories in 4-dimensions, topological gravity and
topological Yang-Mills theory (Donaldson theory)[66], in 3-dimensions one has the Chern–
Simon theory [67] and in 2-dimensions one has topological sigma–models and topological
gravity theories, and topological Yang-Mills theories [4]. Amazingly enough almost all
of these theories seem to be describing the target space physics of some string theory:
The 6-dimensional KS theory is the target space physics of critical topological strings
as we have discussed in this paper. The 4-dimensional topological theories seem also
to be related to target space of N = 2 strings [34] in that the relevant target space
geometry in both case involves self-dual geometries43 . The 3-dimensional CS theory is
equivalent to open string topological theory [23] . Finally the 2d topological YM theories,
which are equivalent to ordinary 2d YM theories may also be viewed as a string theory
using the results of [68] which could also be viewed even as a topological string theory (a
deformed topological sigma–model coupled to gravity [19] [69]). So it seems that many of
these topological field theories are string field theories of string theories which themselves
are topological (i.e. are coupling of 2d topological theories to topological gravity). The
completion of this picture suggests that the N = 2 strings should have a reformulation as
a topological theory in the worldsheet sense, and should also be able to obtain topological
sigma–models and topological gravity theories in 2 dimensions as effective target space

 43
      This connection needs to be clarified further.

                                                140
theories for a topological world sheet theory. Having such a unified picture also raises
the question of what are the relations between various topological theories, and also their
relation to integrable theories. In a sense the six–dimensional topological theories should
play a key role in connecting them. In particular self-dual geometries arise naturally from
considerations of holomorphic vector bundles in six dimensions, through twistor transform.
One could speculate whether this formulation can be used to connect it to the topological
theory describing the open strings on Calabi–Yau [23], which has as a solution an arbitrary
holomorphic vector bundle in six dimensions. Similarly one may expect that the KS theory
which characterizes the complex structures of a six dimensional space be related to the
topological gravity theories in 4d, which characterize self-dual geometries. Clearly a lot
more work remains to be done. We hope to have taken one small step which may be helpful
in the final emergence of a unified picture.

    This research was supported in part by NSF grants PHY-87-14654 and PHY-89-57162
and a Packard fellowship. H.O. is also supported in part by grant-in-aid for scientific
research on priority area “Infinite Analysis” from the ministry of science, education and
culture of Japan.

    We would like to thank S. Axelrod, S. Cordes, C. Faber, S. Hosono, K. Intriligator,
S. Katz, K.S. Narain, I. Singer, T. Taylor, G. Tian, E. Witten and S.T. Yau for valuable
discussions. H.O. also thanks the Lyman Laboratory of Physics, Harvard University where
most of this work was carried out, and the Institute for Theoretical Physics at Santa Bar-
bara where a part of this work was done. C.V. also thanks the Rutgers physics department
for its hospitality and for providing stimulating environment during the final stage of this
work. Also we wish to thank K. House for her assistance in the preparation of figures
appearing in this paper.




                                               141
Appendix A. The Bubbled Torus

      In this appendix we shall rederive from a physical viewpoint the result by Katz (see
appendix of [19]) on the bubbling of spheres in genus 1. Some preliminary computation
for g > 1 is also presented.
      As before, ψ denotes a fermi field which is a section44 of K ⊗ f ∗ TM
                                                                          ∗
                                                                            , whereas χ is a
section of f ∗ TM .
      The basic degenerate instanton in genus one is given by (here D ⊂ M is a rational
curve rigid in M and C is the world–sheet torus)

                                     Γpq ⊂ C × D ⊂ C × M,

given by
                                     (C × {q}) ∪ ({p} × D).                                 (A.1)

      As always, the χ zero–modes are in one–to–one correspondence with the ‘collective
coordinates’ describing the given family of instantons. In the present case we have just
two of them, corresponding to the freedom of choosing the two points p and q in C and D,
respectively. We are also interested in finding the zero–modes of ψ in this configuration.
From the viewpoint of an ‘observer’ in a ‘generic’ point of the torus45 , the situation looks
as follows. The torus C gets mapped into the point q ⊂ D ⊂ M . Then — as for any
constant map — the pullback of TM to C is trivial, and dim H 1 (C, TM ) = 3. However,
there are not really three obstructions, since the deformation of q in the direction tangent
to D is ‘not obstructed’. So we remain with the two zero–modes which are orthogonal to
D at q, in agreement with the index theorem which predicts an equal number of χ and ψ
zero–modes. Our observer on C understands this as follows. For him the instanton Γpq
arises by the following limiting process: One constructs an approximate solution mapping
the world–sheet to the (rational) curve D by taking an usual instanton on the plane, of
scale46 a much smaller than the periods of the torus C and ‘gluing’ it at the point p. Then
letting a → 0 we get a true solution which — to our observer — looks like a ‘delta–function’
instanton centered at p. To be specific, let us identify D with P1 in such a way that the
point q is taken as the origin. Then our approximate instanton reads (for w ∼ p)
                                                     a
                                          f (w) =       .
                                                    w−p
 44
      Strictly speaking, this description is adequate for non–degenerate instantons only.
 45
      I.e. not at the point p where the ‘bubble’ is attached.
 46
      By conformal invariance, there are instanton of any arbitrary small scale.

                                                142
The pullback Kähler form for w ∼ p reads (say, taking D to be a line, and the metric to
be the one induced by Fubini–Study)47

                              a2 dz ∧ dz̄                 1
                                                      =     δ(z) δ(z̄)dz ∧ dz̄,
                           (2πi)(|z|2 + a2 )2             i
                                                a→0

where z ≡ w − p. Of course this is just the statement that we have a δ–function instanton.
Clearly if D is a degree k rational curve this generalizes to
                                                          !
                     the pulled back Kahler class
                                                              = −ik δ(z) δ(z̄)dz ∧ dz̄.   (A.2)
                     as seen by our observer on C

From the viewpoint of this observer, as a → 0 the instanton disappears, leaving a local
operator inserted at the point p. This operator implements a boundary condition at p for
the ψ zero modes; it is this condition that gets rid of the tangent component of ψ leaving
just the two ‘normal’ components.
      To see the nature of the above boundary condition we have to discuss the situation
from the viewpoint of a second observer on D. From the point of view of this observer,
the limit a → 0 is accompanied by a compensating conformal rescaling by a−1 , so that to
him the instanton looks to have a finite size in the limit. However, at a = 0 he happens to
be in a different 2d ‘universe’ with respect to the other guy (i.e. on D). For this observer
the pulled back Kähler form is
                                                                   !
                              the pulled back Kahler class
                                                                       = i∗ ωM ,          (A.3)
                              as seen by our observer on D

where ωM is the Kähler form for M and i: D → M is the embedding. Putting together
the two ‘universes’ one gets

                 the pulled back Kahler class = −ik δ(z) δ(z̄)dz ∧ dz̄ + i∗ ωM ,          (A.4)

which should be compared with Katz’s result, i.e. E1 + h (see appendix of [19]).
      From the viewpoint of the second observer, there are no zero–modes for ψ, since on
the sphere
                                  H 1 (TM ) ≃ H 0 (K ⊗ t∗ TM
                                                           ∗
                                                             ) = 0.

 47
      The normalization of the δ’s is such that the integral of the r.h.s. is just 1.

                                                 143
In order for a zero–mode to be regarded as vanishing by the observer on D, it should have
a vanishing invariant norm as z → p. Let ψ= be the tangent would–be zero–mode. Near
p its norm reads
                                                         2
                                         2          a2
                                   kψ= k =       1+ 2          |ψ= |2
                                                   |z|

which is divergent as z → 0, unless ψ= (0) = 0. But a holomorphic function48 vanishing at
one point vanishes everywhere. Instead for the ‘normal’ zero modes49

                                                     |ψ⊥ |2
                                     kψ⊥ k2 =                    ,
                                                 (1 + a2 /|z|2 )

which vanishes at z = 0 for any ψ⊥ . This shows that we have just two ψ zero modes
(as required by the index theorem). The structure of these zero–modes is as predicted by
Katz.
      The moduli space of the above configuration is M1,2 × P1 (here we identify D ≃ P1 ).
As we vary the point in the moduli space, the zero modes ψia (a = 1, 2) will also vary,
giving a bundle B over the above moduli space. By construction


                                         B = π1∗ H ⊗ π2∗ N ,


where H is the Hodge (line) bundle over M1,1 whose fiber is spanned the holomorphic
one–forms for the corresponding elliptic curve, and N is the normal bundle to D in X.
The curvature of B has the structure 1 ⊗ P + R̃ ⊗ 1, where P is the Hodge bundle curvature
as computed in §.1.1, and R̃ is the curvature of the normal bundle N = TM /TD . As it is
well known
                                        R̃ = R       − θ ∧ θ†                           (A.5)
                                                 N

where θ is the 2nd–fundamental form of


                                    0 → TD → TM → N → 0.

 48
      Recall that from the viewpoint of the first observer TX is trivial and so is K.
 49
      We use that
                                 TX |D = O(2) ⊕ O(−1) ⊕ O(−1).




                                                 144
Thus, in general is not true that the curvature of the normal bundle is the restriction of
the curvature of the tangent bundle to the normal directions. However, is D a rigid sphere
on some Calabi–Yau 3–fold M ,

                                         TM ≃ O(2) ⊕ O(−1) ⊕ O(−1),

and hence the bundle splits and the extra term in (A.5) should be an exact form. Then
the curvature is50
                             i
                         RB            = δ ij N −1 P dy ∧ dȳ + Ri jkl̄ dxk ∧ dx̄l̄ + . . . ,   (A.6)
                                   j

where . . . means exact terms and x are the coordinates of the point q in M .
      Let us summarize: there are 2 zero–modes for χ corresponding to the deformations of
the point p and q, and two zero modes for ψi . Then consider the quantity
          Z * Z                                                 Z                       +
                             ^ Z                            
      −         dy µψi ∂X i       dȳ µ̄ψ̄j̄ ∂¯X̄ j̄ k χm χ̄l̄     R np̄ χk χ̄h̄ ψn ψ̄p̄
                                                                       ml̄              kh̄
         M1,1        C                              C                             C


i.e. the g = 1 one–point function. We wish to compute the contribution of the (single)
degenerate instanton to the above quantity. The subtle identity is (A.4). It means that
we have the replacement

                          kij̄ (0)χi χ̄j̄ 7→ deg(D) δ(z)δ(z̄)χz χ̄z̄ + k̃χx χ̄x̄ ,              (A.7)

where χz (resp. χx ) is the zero mode associated to the variation of the coordinate z (resp.
x) of the point p (resp. q) on C (resp. D), and −ik̃dx ∧ dx̄ ≡ i∗ ωM .
      Integrating away the χ’s and the ψ’s (using the same formulae as in §.1.2) we reduce
to an integration over the boson zero–modes, of the expression
                                   Z
                         deg(D)
                                       δ(z)δ(z̄)dz ∧ dz̄ det[RB ],
                          (2πi)2
                                            M1,2 ⊗D


where RB is given in (A.6). This can be rewritten as
                                         Z
                              deg(D)          c2 (H ⊗ N ).
                                                     M1,1 ⊗D

 50
      We do not write indices for N and P since in the present case the indices can take only one
value.

                                                          145
A simple computation gives (recall N = O(−1) ⊕ O(−1))

                               c2 (H ⊗ N ) = 2 c1 (H) c1 (OD (−1)).

Finally from                        Z              Z
                        2 deg(D)          c1 (H)       c1 (O(−1)) =
                                   M1,1            D
                                                                  2
                         = 2 deg(D) deg(O(−1)) χ(M1,1 ) =            deg(D).
                                                                  12

      Preliminary Considerations for Genus g > 1

    If M is simply–connected it is also algebraic. Then let ω0 be the Kähler form induced
                                                                                     R
by the imbedding of M inside PN . By degree of a curve C lying on M we mean C ω0 .
Then a curve of degree one is a line in PN and hence it is necessarily rational. Therefore
for all g the O(e−t ) contribution to Fg should arise from maps of the form

                                               f         i
                                           Σg → D ֒→ M,

where D is a degree 1 rational curve on M , i the inclusion and f some degree 1 holomorphic
map. However, for g > 0 there is no such a thing as a degree 1 meromorphic function. Thus
at first sight, it may seem that for g > 0 the O(e−t ) term in Fg should vanish. However,
it is not so as was shown explicitly in ref.[19] for g = 1. The point is that although there
is no smooth instanton in this topological class, we can construct an approximate solution
mapping Σg to D by taking an usual instanton on the plane for the P1 sigma–model,
of scale51 a much smaller than the periods of the curve Σg and ‘gluing’ it at the point
p ∈ Σg . The approximation gets better and better as a → 0. In the limit we get a solution
which looks like a ‘delta–function’ instanton centered at p. However, there is a better
viewpoint. By conformal invariance, while we let a → 0 we can do a compensating scale
transformation in a neighborhood of p such that the instanton remains of a finite scale in
the limit. In this picture, as a → 0 a sphere will ‘bubble off’ the world–sheet. In terms of
the graph Γ of the map Σg → D, the resulting degenerate instanton will be (q is a point
in D)
                                    Γpq ⊂ Σg × D ⊂ Σg × M,

 51
      By conformal invariance, there are instanton of any arbitrary small scale.

                                                   146
given by
                                     (Σg × {q}) ∪ ({p} × D).                               (A.8)

That such singular instantons like Γpq should be taken into account, follows from Gromov’s
theory of symplectic invariants; as t̄ → ∞ the functional measure gets concentrated on
the critical points only if the integration space (the ‘space of all maps’) is compactified.
Otherwise the instanton may ‘escape to infinity’. Now, these configurations (A.8) belong
to the Gromov compactification of the ‘space of all maps’.
    Comparing with the genus one case, it appears that the following computation should
be relevant for the higher genus bubbling
                                   Z
                                                   C3g−1 (B).                              (A.9)
                                         Mg,1 ⊗D


where
                                B = π1∗ H ⊗ π2∗ N ∗ ⊕ π1∗ H̃ ⊗ π2∗ TD
                                                                    ∗
                                                                      .

Here N is the normal bundle to D in M and H is the Hodge vector bundle as before.
The fiber of H is H 0 (Σg , K). Instead H̃ is the bundle with fiber Γ(O(−p) ⊗ K) — that
is the holomorphic one–forms vanishing at p ∈ Σg . Obviously we have the following exact
sequence
                                      0 → H̃ → H → L → 0,                                 (A.10)

where L is the line bundle over Mg,1 whose fiber is Tp∗ .
    From the definition of B one has

                                  c(B) = c(H ⊗ N ∗ ) c(H̃ ⊗ TD
                                                             ∗
                                                               )

and then
                             c3g−1 (B) = c2g (H ⊗ N ∗ ) cg−1 (H̃ ⊗ TD
                                                                    ∗
                                                                      )

    Since D is one–dimensional

           c2g (H ⊗ N ) = cg (H)2 − 2c1 (N ) cg (H) cg−1 (H) = 2c1 (N ) cg (H) Cg−1 (H)
           cg−1 (H̃ ⊗ TD ) = cg−1 (H̃) − cg−2 (H̃) c1 (TD ).

where, in the first line we used (5.53). Now we see that

                       c1 (N ) = 2 c1 (OD (−1)),       c1 (TD ) = c1 (OD (2)).

                                                 147
On the other hand, from (A.10)
                                                                        
                                    c(H) = c(H̃) c(L) = c(H̃) 1 + c1 (L) ,

or equivalently,
                                                     g
                                                      X              
                                     c(H̃) = c(H) 1 +   (−1)k c1 (L)k ,
                                                                    k=1

which in particular gives
                                                         g
                                                         X
                                    cg−1 (H̃) =                (−1)k cg−k−1 (H) c1 (L)k .
                                                         k=0

Then               Z                   Z h                              i
                           c3g−1 (B) =    c2g (H ⊗ N ∗ ) cg−1 (H̃ ⊗ TD
                                                                     ∗
                                                                       ) =
                       D                    D
                                                                        g
                                                                        X
                                      = 4 cg (H) cg−1 (H)                   (−1)k c1 (L)k cg−k−1 (H).
                                                                        k=0

The term with k = 0 vanishes, since the integrand is the pull–back of a (3g − 2)–form on
Mg,0 . Also the term with k = g vanishes for trivial reasons. Comparing with [45] this can
be rewritten in terms of Mumford classes as
                                    g−1
                                    X                Z
                                                 k
                                4         (−1)                λg ∧ λg−1 ∧ λgk −1 ∧ κk−1 .
                                    k=1                  Mg


It remains to understand the precise relation between this Chern class computation and
the actual bubbling coefficient.




                                                                  148
Appendix B. Further analysis on the master anomaly equation

      In section 3, we found that the generating function
                                 ∞ X
                                 X ∞
                                     1                                          χ        
                                                           (g)
              W (λ, x; t, t) =                λ2g−2 Ci1 ···in xi1 · · · xin +          − 1 log λ         (B.1)
                                 g=0 n=0
                                         n!                                       24

is characterized by the two equations,

              ∂
               i
                 exp(W ) =
             ∂t                                                                                      (B.2)
                  λ2        2K j j̄ kk̄   ∂2            j   ∂     k ∂
             =       C e G G                    − Gīj x λ     +x         exp(W )
                  2 īj̄ k̄             ∂xj ∂xk             ∂λ     ∂xk

and                                                     
                      ∂      k j ∂             χ       ∂
                         + Γij x      + ∂i K      −1−λ       exp(W ) =
                     ∂ti          ∂xk          24      ∂λ
                                                                                                       (B.3)
                          ∂             1       j k
                    =        − ∂i F1 − 2 Cijk x x exp(W ).
                         ∂xi           2λ
                                                                                                   (g)
The first equation (B.3) summarizes the holomorphic anomaly equations for Ci1 ···in , and
                                                     (g)
the second equation (B.3) implies that Ci1 ···in in W (λ, x; t, t) are given by derivatives of
the partition function Fg . In section 6, we developed a method to solve the holomorphic
anomaly equation order by order in g. In this appendix, we analyze the two equations
(B.2) and (B.3) directly to all order in g. We hope that the method presented here would
be useful to understand non–pertubative aspects of the string theory.
      Let us first solve the anomaly equation (B.2) without imposing (B.3). This turned
out to be possible by the Borel transformation in the string coupling constant λ and by
the Fourier transformation in xi .
                                  Z
             exp(W (λ, x; t, t)) = dp dq exp(−λ−1 q + iλ−1 xi pi + Γ(q, p; t, t)).                       (B.4)

The anomaly equation (B.2) for W is transformed into the following first-order linear
differential equation
                                               
                            ∂              ∂             1
                              i
                                + iGīj q           Γ = − C īj̄ k̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ pj pk                 (B.5)
                            ∂t            ∂pj            2

A special solution to this equation is easily found as

                                                1
                             Γ0 (q, p; t, t) = − S ij pi pj + iS i pi q + Sq 2 .
                                                2
                                                       149
This satisfies (B.5) by the definitions of S ij , S i and S

                       S ij = C īj̄ e2K Gj j̄ Gkk̄ , S i = C ī e2K Giī , S = Ce2K
                       C īj̄ k̄ = Dī C j̄ k̄ , C j̄ k̄ = Dj̄ C k̄ , C k̄ = Dk̄ C.

Since (B.5) is first-order and linear, its general solution can be expressed as


                 exp(Γ(q, p; t, t)) = ϑ(q, p − iq∂ log(eK |f |2 ); t) exp(Γ0 (q, p; t, t))        (B.6)


where f (t) is a meromorphic section of L, and ϑ does not depend on t except through eK
in the second argument.
     The general solution (B.6), after the Borel transformation, does not necessarily have
the form (B.1). So we need to impose the second equation (B.3). After the Borel trans-
formation (B.4), (B.2) becomes
                                                               
            ∂     k      ∂      j            ∂       ∂        χ
               − Γij pk     − Γij − ∂i K q     + pj     +n+2−       exp(Γ) =
           ∂ti          ∂pj                 ∂q      ∂pj       24
                                            
                 ∂             1        ∂2
          = ipi      − ∂i F1 + Cijk            exp(Γ).
                 ∂q            2     ∂pj ∂pk

where n is the dimensions of the moduli space of the N = 2 theory. Substituting (B.6) in
the above, we obtain a differential equation for ϑ as

         ∂
                    k            ∂                  ∂           ∂ 
               i
                 + fij (t)p̃k         − ifij (t)q̃       − ip̃i      ϑ=
          ∂t                    ∂ p̃j              ∂ p̃j        ∂ q̃
               1                                                                                (B.7)
                            ∂2    1 jk           j                     2
           =   C̃ijk (t) j k − ei (t)p̃j p̃k + iei (t)p̃j q̃ + ei (t)q̃ + hi (t) ϑ,
             2          ∂ p̃ ∂ p̃ 2

where
                                                   
                p̃i = f −1 pi − iq∂i log(eK |f |2 ) ,          q̃ = f −1 q, C̃ijk = f −2 Cijk .

Due to the special geometry relation, the coefficients

                     k
                    fij (t) =Cijl S lk − Γkij − δik ∂j log(eK |f |2 ) − δjk ∂k log(eK |f |2 )
                                                              
                    fij (t) =Cijk S k − S kl ∂l log(eK |f |2 ) + Di ∂j log(eK |f |2 )+
                                + ∂i log(eK |f |2 )∂j log(eK |f |2 )

                                                        150
are holomorphic in t, and so are
                             h                                        i
                                                          j k
             ejk
              i   (t) = f −2
                              Di S jk
                                      + Cimn S mj nk
                                                 S   −  δi S  − δi
                                                                  k j
                                                                   S
                             h
              eji (t) = f −2 Di S j + Cimn S m S nj − 2Sδij +
                                                                                              i
                                  + (2S j δik − Di S jk − Cimn S mj S nk )∂k log(eK |f |2 )
                                 h        1
                            −2
               ei (t) = f         Di S − Cijk S j S k −
                                          2
                                   − (Di S j + Cimn S m S nj − 2Sδij )∂j log(eK |f |2 )+
                                      3          1
                                   + ( Di S jk + Cimn S mj S nk − S j δik )×
                                      2          2                     i
                                      × ∂j log(eK |f |2 )∂k log(eK |f |2 ) .

Due to the genus-1 anomaly equation, hi (t) given by

                                     1                        χ
                     hi (t) = ∂i F1 + Cijk S jk − ∂i K n + 2 −    − Γjij
                                     2                         24

is also holomorphic.
    For each ti , the equation (B.7) is of the form of the Schrödinger equation for a particle
moving in an (n + 1)-dimensional space of p̃i and q̃ in a t-dependent harmonic oscillator
potential and a t-dependent constant magnetic field. Since it is a first order differential
equation in t, we can solve it uniquely once we know ϑ at particular value of t. The situation
is similar to the case of the Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) model on a Riemann surface
where the partition function satisfies the heat equation with the moduli of the surface Σ
being time-like variables and the the moduli of the holomorphic vector bundle on Σ being
space-like variables. It is known that the WZW model is related to the three-dimensional
Chern–Simons (CS) theory, and the heat equation in the WZW model is identified as the
physical state condition for a wave–function in the CS theory. The similarity between the
WZW model and the Kodaira–Spencer theory suggests that the Schrödinger type equation
(B.7) for the (Borel–transformed) generating function ϑ may also be derived as a physical
state condition of some higher-dimensional system. It would be very interesting to identify
such a system. This would also explain the origin of the finite dimensional quantum system
discussed in [27].




                                                     151
                                       References

 [1] W. Lerche, C. Vafa and N. P. Warner, Nucl.Phys. B324 (1989) 427
 [2] S. Cecotti and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B367 (1991) 359-461
 [3] L. Dixon in Proc. of the 1987 ICTP Summer Workshop in High Energy Physics and
     Cosmology, Trieste
 [4] E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys. 117 (1988) 353;
     E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys. 118 (1988) 411;
     T. Eguchi and S. -K. Yang, Mod. Phys. Lett. A5 (1990) 1693
 [5] R. Dijkgraaf, H. Verlinde and E. Verlinde, Nucl. Phys. B352 (1991) 59
 [6] L. Alvarez-Gaume and D. Z. Freedman, Phys.Lett. 94B (1980) 171
 [7] P. Candelas, Xenia C. de la Ossa, Paul S. Green and L. Parkes, Nucl. Phys. B359
     (1991) 21
 [8] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison Commun. Math. Phys. 151 (1993) 245-262
 [9] E. Witten, in Essays on Mirror Manifolds, ed. by S. T. Yau, International Press, 1992
[10] C. Vafa, in Essays on Mirror Manifolds, ed. by S. T. Yau, International Press, 1992
[11] P. Griffiths and J. Harris Principles of Algebraic Geometry New York, Wiley, 1978.
[12] A.B. Zamolodchikov, JETP Lett. 43 (1986) 730.
[13] R. Bryant and P. Griffiths, in Arithmetic and Geometry, papers dedicated to I.R.
     Shafarevitch, eds. M. Artin and J. Tate, (Boston, Birkhäuser, 1983), vol.2 p. 77.
[14] B. de Wit and A. van Proeyen, Nucl. Phys. B245 (1984) 89;
     B. de Wit, P.G. Lauwers and A. van Proyen, Nucl. Phys. B255 (1985) 569;
     E. Cremmer, C. Kounnas, A. van Proeyen, J.–P. Derendinger, S. Ferrara, B. de Wit
     and L. Girardello, Nucl. Phys. B250 (1985) 385;
     S. Cecotti, Comm. Math. Phys. 131 (1990) 517.
[15] S. Cecotti, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A6 (1991) 1749 ;
     S. Cecotti, Nucl. Phys. B355 (1991) 755
[16] B. Gato-Rivera and A.M. Semikhatov, Phys. Lett. B293 (1992) 72-80
[17] M. Bershadsky, W. Lerche, D. Nemeschansky, N.P. Warner, Extended N=2 Supercon-
     formal Structure of Gravity and W Gravity Coupled to Matter CERN-TH-6694-92,
     hep-th/9211040
[18] J. Polchinski, Commun. Math. Phys. 104 (1986) 37
[19] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Holomorphic Anomaly in Topolog-
     ical Field Theories, HUTP-93/A008, RIMS-915, hep-th/9302103
[20] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B340 (1990) 281;
     R. Dijkgraaf and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B342 (1990) 486.
[21] E. Verlinde and H. Verlinde, Nucl. Phys. B348 (1991) 457
[22] K. Li, Nucl. Phys. B354 (1991) 725-739

                                           152
[23] E. Witten, Chern–Simons Gauge Theory as a String Theory, IASSNS-HEP-92/45,
     hep-th/9207094
[24] D. Kutasov, Phys. Lett. B220 (1989) 153
[25] R. Dijkgraaf, E. Verlinde and H. Verlinde, Nucl. Phys. B352 (1991) 59
[26] W. Schmid, Invent. Math. 22 (1973) 211.
[27] E. Witten, Quantum Background Independence in String Theory, IAS preprint,
     IASSNS-HEP-93/29, hep-th/9306122
[28] K. Kodaira and D.C. Spencer, Annals of Math. 67 (1958) 328;
     K. Kodaira, L. Niremberg and D.C. Spencer, Annals of Math. 68 (1958) 450;
     K. Kodaira and D.C. Spencer, Acta Math. 100 (1958) 281;
     K. Kodaira and D.C. Spencer, Annals of Math. 71 (1960) 43.
[29] G. Tian, in Essays on Mirror manifolds, ed. by S. T. Yau, International Press, 1992;
     G. Tian, in Mathematical aspects of String theory, ed. by S. T. Yau, World Scientific,
     Singapore, 1987.
[30] G. Tian, private communication
[31] A.N. Todorov, Comm. Math. Phys. 126 (1989) 325.
[32] M. Kuranishi, Annals of Math 75 (1962) 536.
[33] B. Zwiebach, Closed String Field Theory: Quantum Action and the B-V Master equa-
     tion, IASSNS-HEP-92/41, MIT-CTP-2102, hep-th/9206084
[34] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B361 (1991) 469, Mod. Phys. Lett. A5 (1990)
     1389
[35] I. A. Batalin and G. A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Rev D28 (1983) 2567
[36] M. Henneaux, Lectures on the antifield-BRST formalism for gauge theories, Proc. of
     XXII GIFT Meeting
[37] D. B. Ray and I. M. Singer, Ann. Math. 98 (1973) 154
[38] J.M. Bismut and D.S. Freed, Comm. Math. Phys. 106 (1986) 159; 107 (1986) 103;
     J. -M. Bismut, H. Gillet and C. Soule, Comm. Math. Phys. 115 (1988) 49, 79, 301 ;
     J.M. Bismut and K. Köhler, Higher analytic torsion forms for direct images and anom-
     aly formulas, Univ. de Paris-sud, preprint 91-58.
[39] A. Belavin and V. Knizhnik, Phys. Lett. 168B (1986) 201 ;
     L. Alvarez-Gaume, G. Moore and C. Vafa, Commun. Math. Phys. 112 (1987) 503
[40] F. Hirzebruch, Topological methods in Algebraic Geometry, Springer-Verlag, 1966
[41] R. Shoen and S.T. Yau, Invent. Math. 16 (1972) 161.
[42] J. Tromba, Man. Math. 59 (1987) 249.
[43] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. 371 (1992) 191;
     E. Witten, in Essays on Mirror Manifolds, ed. by S.T. Yau, International Press
[44] S. Hamidi and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B279 (1987) 465
[45] D. Mumford, in Arithmetic and Geometry, papers dedicated to I.R. Shafarevitch, eds.
     M. Artin and J. Tate (Boston, Birkäuser, 1983).

                                            153
[46]   C. Faber, Ann. Math. 132 (1990) 331.
[47]   L. Castellani, R. D’Auria and S. Ferrara, Class. Quant. Grav. 7 (1990) 1767.
[48]   B. R. Plesser and M. R. Greene, Nucl. Phys. B338 (1990) 15
[49]   V. Kazakov, A. Migdal, Nucl. Phys. B311 (1989) 171 ;
       J. Polchinski, Nucl. Phys. B346 (1990) 253
[50]   S. Mukhi and C. Vafa, Two-Dimensional Black Hole as a Topological Coset Model of
       C=1 String Theory HUTP-93-A002, hep-th/9301083
[51]   D.R. Morrison, in Essays on Mirror Manifolds, ed. by S.T. Yau, International Press,
       1992.
[52]   A. Klemm and S. Theisen, Considerations of One-Modulus Calabi-Yau Compactifi-
       cations: Pickard-Fuchs Equations, Kähler Potentials and Mirror maps , KA-THEP-
       03/92, TUM-TH-143-92
[53]   I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain and T. R. Taylor, Topological Amplitudes in
       String Theory, hep-th/9307158
[54]   N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B303 (1988) 206;
       S. Cecotti, S. Ferrara and L. Girardello, J. Mod. Phys. A4 (1989) 2475.s
[55]   D. Friedan, E. Martinec and S. Shenker, Phys. Lett. 160B (1985) 55
[56]   J. P. Derendinger, L. E. Ibanez and H. P. Nilles, Phys. Lett. 155B (1985) 65 ;
       M. Dine, R. Rohm, N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 156B (1985) 55
[57]   This is currently being pursued by Narain et. al.
[58]   V. Kaplunovsky, Nucl. Phys. B307 (1988) 36 ;
       L.J. Dixon, V.S. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis, Nucl. Phys. B355 (1991) 649;
       S.Ferrara, C.Kounnas, D.Lüst and F.Zwirner, Nucl. Phys. B365 (1991) 431;
       I. Antoniadis, E. Gava and K.S. Narain, Nucl. Phys. B 383 (1992) 93 and Phys. Lett.
       B283 (1992) 209;
       J.–P. Derendinger, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas and F. Zwirner, Nucl. Phys. B372 (1992)
       145.
[59]   E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B268 (1986) 79
[60]   S. Shenker, Proceedings of Careges Workshop on Random Surfaces, Quantum Gravity
       and Strings, 1990.
[61]   S. Axelrod and I. Singer, Chern-Simons Perturbation Theory , MIT preprints, hep-
       th/9110056, hep-th/9304087
[62]   N. Berkovitz, Nucl. Phys. B395 (1993) 77
[63]   E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B373 (1992) 187;
       E. Witten and B. Zweibach, Nucl. Phys. B377 (1992) 55
[64]   S. Cecotti and C. Vafa, Ising Model and N=2 Supersymmetric Theories, HUTP-92-
       A044, hep-th/9209085
[65]   A. Losev,Descendants constructed from matter fields in topological Landau-Ginzburg
       theories coupled to topological gravity, hepth/9211089 ;

                                            154
       A. Losev and I. Polyubin, On Connection between Topological Landau-Ginsburg Grav-
       ity and Integrable Systems, hep-th/9305079;
       T. Eguchi, H. Kanno, Y. Yamada and S. -K. Yang, Topological Strings, Flat Coordi-
       nates and Gravitational Descendants, hep-th/9302048
[66]   E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys. 117 (1988) 117 ;
       E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 206B (1988) 601
[67]   E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys. 121 (1989) 351
[68]   D. Gross, Nucl. Phys. B400 (1993) 161;
       D. Gross and W. Taylor, Nucl. Phys. B400 (1993) 181, Nucl. Phys. B403 (1993) 395
[69]   R. Dijkgraaf, K. Intriligator and R. Rudd unpublished




                                           155
