                                                     QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I

                                                                           KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI




arXiv:1505.06703v1 [hep-th] 25 May 2015
                                               A BSTRACT. This is the first in a series of papers which analyze the problem of quantiz-
                                               ing the theory coupling Kodaira-Spencer gravity (or BCOV theory) and holomorphic
                                               Chern-Simons on Calabi-Yau manifolds using the formalism for perturbative QFT de-
                                               veloped by the first author. In this paper, we focus on flat space Cd for d odd. We
                                               prove that there exists a unique quantization of the theory coupling BCOV theory and
                                               holomorphic Chern-Simons theory with gauge group the supergroup GL( N | N ). We
                                               deduce a canonically defined quantization of BCOV theory on its own.
                                                   We also discuss some conjectural links between BCOV theory in various dimen-
                                               sions and twists of physical theories: in complex dimension 3 we conjecture a relation-
                                               ship to twists of (1, 0) supersymmetric theories and in complex dimension 5 to a twist
                                               of type IIB supergravity.




                                                                                    C ONTENTS

                                          1.   Introduction                                                                                2

                                          2.   Holomorphic Chern-Simons theory                                                            23

                                          3.   Coupling with Kodaira-Spencer theory of gravity                                            30

                                          4.   Quantum open-closed BCOV theory                                                            36

                                          5.   Existence and uniqueness-Local theory                                                      47

                                          6.   Obstruction theory                                                                         48

                                          7.   Annulus anomaly cancellation                                                               64

                                          8.   Classical BCOV interaction                                                                 83

                                          9.   (1, 0) BCOV theory                                                                         87
                                                                                          1
2                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


    References                                                                              104




                                     1. I NTRODUCTION

   The Kodaira-Spencer theory of gravity was introduced by Bershadsky, Cecotti, Ooguri
and Vafa [BCOV94] as the closed string field theory corresponding to the B-twisted
topological string theory. In the original formulation, BCOV theory (as we call it) is a
field theory defined on a Calabi-Yau manifold of dimension 3. In [CL12], we formu-
lated BCOV theory on a Calabi-Yau manifold of any dimension.

  In [BCOV94], the problem of constructing a perturbative quantization of BCOV
theory is left open. After all, BCOV theory is a 6-dimensional, interacting, and non-
renormalizable theory. One therefore expects the theory to have an infinite number of
counter-terms, and therefore an infinite number of coupling constants.

   In fact, there is an even more serious potential problem: as one proceeds in the loop
expansion, there are infinitely many potential anomalies to quantization. So it is not
at all obvious that any quantum theory even exists.

   One of the main properties of quantum field theory is locality, which allows us to
build up the whole quantum theory from local data on the underlying manifold. In
this paper, we analyze the problem of specifying a canonically-defined quantization
of BCOV theory on a local piece of odd dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold, i.e., a flat
space Cd for any odd d. We do this by considering the coupling of BCOV theory
to holomorphic Chern-Simons theory. Holomorphic Chern-Simons is the open-string
field theory for the topological B-model, and was introduced by Witten [Wit92]. We
can call the coupled theory open-closed BCOV theory. The precise theorem is the
following.

Theorem. On Cd for d odd, there exists a unique perturbative quantization of open-closed
BCOV theory, where in the open sector the gauge Lie algebra is the super Lie algebra gl( N |
N ), and we require the quantization to be compatible with inclusions gl( N | N ) ,→ gl( N + k |
N + k ).
                      QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                        3


   In other words, we construct a canonical quantization of coupling BCOV theory
with large N holomorphic Chern-Simons theory (with gauge group gl( N | N )). In
particular, one gets a quantization of the purely closed theory. (Roughly speaking,
this is for the same reason that closed string theory can exist on its own but that open
string theory requires closed strings). As a corollary, we find

Corollary. There is a canonical quantum BCOV theory on Cd (for d odd) which extends to a
quantization of the coupled open-closed theory.

  In other words, all the infinitely many possible counter-terms that can appear be-
cause the theory is non-renormalizable are uniquely fixed by the requirement of com-
patability with holomorphic Chern-Simons.

  Some comments are in order:



   (1) It is not possible to quantize holomorphic Chern-Simons theory by itself with-
       out coupling to the closed-string field theory. There is a one-loop anomaly
       in holomorphic Chern-Simons theory which is cancelled by the closed string
       sector.
   (2) It is not possible to quantize the coupled open-closed theory where on the open
       sector we use the Lie algebra gl( N ) as our gauge Lie algebra, because of a one-
       loop anomaly.
   (3) There is a variant of this story (in 3 complex dimensions) which works for
       holomorphic Chern-Simons theory where the Lie algebra of the gauge group
       is sl( N | N ). In this case, to cancel the anomaly, we need to use a variant of
       BCOV theory which we call (1, 0) BCOV theory. The terminology is because
       of a conjectural relationship with the (1, 0) tensor multiplet in 6 dimensions,
       which is similar to a relationship studied in the literature between BCOV the-
       ory and the (2, 0) tensor multiplet. We construct a unique quantization of the
       system coupling (1, 0) BCOV theory to sl( N | N ) holomorphic Chern-Simons
       theory, not just on C3 but on a variety of non-compact Calabi-Yaus.



The theorem is proved using the obstruction theory methods developed in [Cos11]
for perturbative quantization. For any quantum field theory, there is a cochain com-
plex (built from possible Lagrangians) whose H 0 describes possible deformations of
4                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


the theory, and whose H 1 describes anomalies, which are obstructions to quantiza-
tion. For a renormalizable theory, one needs only consider a scale-invariant subcom-
plex of this obstruction-deformation complex, which will typically have finite dimen-
sional cohomology groups. In this case, H 0 is the space of marginal deformations,
which is typically finite dimensional, and the finite dimensionality of H 1 indicates
that there are only finitely many possible anomalies. For a non-renormalizable the-
ory, the scale invariance argument does not apply, and H 0 and H 1 are both typically
infinite-dimensional.

   For BCOV theory on its own, or holomorphic Chern-Simons on its own, this is what
we find. However, for the coupled open-closed BCOV theory, we find a remarkable
cancellation: beyond one loop, the obstruction-deformation complex for the coupled
theory has zero cohomology. Potential obstructions and deformations for the closed-
string sector are precisely cancelled by obstructions and deformations from the mixed
sectors and from the purely open sector. We will explain the heuristics of this argu-
ment in more detail later in the introduction.

   At one loop, we have to perform a detailed calculation to verify that a possible
anomaly is cancelled. This cancellation is very similar to the Green-Schwartz mecha-
nism for anomaly cancellation.


1.1. Relationship to string theory. Before discussing the proof in detail, we will ex-
plain a little about how this result relates to ideas from string theory, and in particular
explain a conjectural framework relating our open-closed BCOV theory in 6 real di-
mensions to certain field theories of current interest in physics (see [GT14] and the
references therein).

   BCOV theory on C3 is the closed-string field theory for the topological B-model in
three complex dimensions. That is, the fields of BCOV theory are the (S1 -equivariant)
closed-string states of the topological B-model, and the classical BCOV action func-
tional can be described in terms of genus zero correlation functions of the B-model.

  The yoga of string theory tells us that for any string theory, one can construct a
gravity theory as the low-energy limit of the closed-string field theory. For example,
type IIB supergravity is supposed to arise in this way from type IIB string theory. This
gravity theory will, of course, be non-renormalizable, and will have infinitely many
coupling constants and infinitely many possible anomalies. However, the low energy
                      QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                        5


limit of string theory is supposed to provide a canonically defined quantization of this
non-renormalizable theory, which is why string theory can produce a quantum theory
of gravity.

   BCOV theory fits into this framework. It is a non-renormalizable theory of gravi-
tational type (gravitational, because the fields of BCOV theory describe fluctuations
of the complex structure of a Calabi-Yau, hence the Calabi-Yau metric). However, the
yoga of string theory tells us that the topological string should provide a canonically
defined quantization. This has not been rigorously proven: although categorical meth-
ods [KS06, Cos07, Lur09] can provide a rigorous theory of the topological B-model, it
is not known how to use these methods to produce something satisfying the locality
axioms of a quantum field theory.

   What this paper achieves is to produce the canonically-defined quantization of
BCOV theory that one expects from string theory yoga, but without using topological
string theory. Although our methods are inspired by string theory, we do not use the
string world-sheet at all. We find that a simple compatibility between BCOV theory
and holomorphic Chern-Simons theory is enough to fix the quantization uniquely.

  One can hope that our methods apply beyond topological strings, and give a new
approach to quantizing other string theories. We hope to investigate this in future
publications.


1.2. Twisted supergravity. One point at which our work connects directly to string
theory is via the following conjecture.

Conjecture. BCOV theory on C5 is a twist of type IIB supergravity theory on R10 .

  This conjecture will be explored in more detail in other publications.

   The concept of twisted supergravity is a slightly subtle one, and we will discuss it
in more detail elsewhere. For now, let us explain the main idea. Any supergravity the-
ory has gauged local supersymmetry. To quantize the theory, one introduces Fadeev-
Popov ghosts corresponding to local supersymmetries. The ghosts for fermionic sym-
metries will be bosonic fields.

  Twisted supergravity is simply supergravity in perturbation theory around an un-
usual background, where the bosonic ghost field has some non-zero value. To satisfy
6                                     KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


the equations of motion, this bosonic ghost field must be a (generalized) Killing spinor
and have square zero. One reason for using the terminology “twisted supergravity” is
that, if we consider a supersymmetric field theory in a supergravity background where
the bosonic ghost field takes value some supercharge Q, this has the same effect as re-
placing the observables of the supersymmetric field theory by their Q-cohomology 1.
This procedure is often called twisting2.

   Different choices of bosonic ghost field give us different twists of supergravity.
We need to describe which particular twist of type IIB supergravity we conjecture
is equivalent to BCOV theory on C5 . In type IIB supergravity in the flat Minkowski
background, where all other bosonic fields are zero, there are 32 covariant constant
spinors. There is a unique SU (5) invariant spinor Q which is of weight one under the
“naive” R-symmetry group SO(2). The twisted supergravity we have in mind is the
one where the bosonic ghost field takes value Q.

  If one accepts this conjecture, then the results of this paper give us a new method to
quantize part of type IIB supergravity.

  The open-string analog of the twist we consider was analyzed by Baulieu [Bau10],
who showed that 5-complex dimensional holomorphic Chern-Simons is the holomor-
phic twist of 10-dimensional maximally supersymmetric gauge theory. It is therefore
natural to conjecture that the coupled open-closed BCOV theory we construct is the
holomorphic twist of the theory coupling type IIB supergravity with the maximally
supersymmetric 10 dimensional gauge theory with gauge Lie algebra gl( N | N ).

   In fact, Baulieu’s result gives some strong evidence for the conjeture that BCOV
theory is a twist of type IIB supergravity. As we will see shortly, the fields of BCOV
theory with the linearized BRST operator are the universal cochain complex which can
couple to holomorphic Chern-Simons by single-trace operators. At the classical level,
type IIB supergravity can be coupled to maximally supersymmetric gauge theory in
10 dimensions, which is the gauge theory living on the D9 brane, and this coupling
is by single-trace operators. This implies that twisted type IIB supergravity can be

    1Or more precisely, adding Q to the BRST operator of the theory
    2
     More properly, in the terminology of Witten, twisting involves both changing the action of the
Lorentz group on the space of fields and then adding such a Q to the BRST operator. It is often use-
ful to use the term twisting for the more general procedure where one simply adds a supercharge to the
BRST operator.
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                             7


coupled to the twisted 10 dimensional gauge theory, which is holomorphic Chern-
Simons. Since BCOV theory is the universal object admitting such a coupling, we find
in this way a cochain map from the fields of twisted supergravity (equipped with the
linearized BRST operator) to those of BCOV theory.




1.3. Relation to 6 dimensional theories with (1, 0) supersymmetry. There is a conjec-
tural relationship between open-closed BCOV theory and certain 6-dimensional field
theories constructed from branes in type IIA string theory and in M-theory. The (1, 0)
supersymmetry algebra in 6 dimensions has a unique SU (3)-invariant supercharge Q,
up to rotation by the R-symmetry group. Taking the cohomology with respect to such
a Q gives a twist of any (1, 0) supersymmetric field theory. This twist is holomorphic
in the sense discussed in [Cos13].

  The following conjecture grew out of conversations with Davide Gaiotto.

Conjecture. Consider the following system of branes in type IIA string theory on R10 . We
have a single NS5 brane on R6 ⊂ R10 , where the R6 is the locus where x6 , . . . , x9 are zero.
We have k semi-infinite D6 branes spanning the half space where x6 ≥ 0, x7 , x8 , x9 = 0, and
k semi-infinite D6 branes spanning the opposite half-space where x6 ≤ 0, x7 , x8 , x9 = 0.

   On the world-volume for the NS5 brane in this configuration is a theory with (1, 0) super-
symmetry. The conjecture is that the holomorphic twist of this theory is open-closed BCOV
theory where the Lie algebra of the gauge group for the open sector is gl(k | k).

 Let us discuss the evidence for this conjecture. Let us first discuss the case k = 0, in
which case the conjecture relates BCOV theory to the theory living on the NS5 brane.

   The fields of the NS5 brane theory form a single tensor multiplet with (2, 0) super-
symmetry. One of the fields of BCOV theory is a closed (2, 1) form, which one expects
to identify with 9 of the 10 components of the self dual 3-form of the free (2, 0) tensor
multiplet. Marino, Minasian, Moore and Strominger argued in [MMMS99] that the su-
persymmetric equations of motion of the M5 brane theory on a Calabi-Yau manifold
include the Kodaira-Spencer equations which are the equations of motion of BCOV
theory. Kapustin also argued [Kap04] that the partition function of the type IIA NS5
brane theory is the same as the partition function of the topological B-model, i.e. of
BCOV theory.
8                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   This provides some evidence in the case k = 0. For the more general case, one needs
to understand a relationship between the D6 brane gauge theory and holomorphic
Chern-Simons, which we will sketch without proof (and hopefully return to in a future
publication). The claim is that there is a certain supercharge Q in the supersymmetry
algebra acting on the D6 brane gauge theory, which is SU (3)-invariant and also has the
feature that every translation is Q-exact. Up to rotation by the R-symmetry group and
scaling, these two features fix Q uniquely. The Q-cohomology of the D6 brane gauge
theory is then a topological theory in the weak sense that the operators corresponding
to translation in space time are trivial. The claim is that this twisted 7d theory has a
non-topological boundary condition where holomorphic Chern-Simons theory lives
on the boundary.

   From this claim, it is easy to imagine how gl(k | k ) holomorphic Chern-Simons
theory arises. One collection of D6 branes will contribute gl(k) holomorphic Chern-
Simons theory living on the boundary, which is the NS5 brane. The other collection
of k D6 branes will also contribute gl(k ) holomorphic Chern-Simons, but with the op-
posite level. Strings connecting the two collections of D6 branes give bi-fundamental
matter, which when twisted become the fields of holomorphic Chern-Simons corre-
sponding to the odd elements of the Lie algebra gl(k | k ).

   This conjecture is in a sense T-dual to a result of Mikhalyov and Witten [MW14].
They considered a configuration of branes in type IIB consisting of 2k D3 branes end-
ing on a 3-manifold living inside an NS5 brane, with k D3 branes coming from each
side. In this situation, they showed that after Q-cohomology for a certain supercharge
Q, the theory living on the 3-manifold is ordinary Chern-Simons theory for the group
GL(k | k ).

  If one applies T-duality to 3 of the 6 directions of the IIA NS5 brane in our situation,
the D6 branes are converted into D3 branes and one goes from our situation to theirs.

  To understand the link between the work of Mikhalyov and Witten and our conjec-
ture, one needs to understand why holomorphic Chern-Simons and ordinary Chern-
Simons should be T-dual. According to Kapustin [Kap04], one expects that the NS5
brane theory in type IIB can be described by the A-model topological string. T-
dualizing 3 directions in a type IIB NS5 brane brings us to a type IIA NS5 brane, which
should be the topological B-model. This relationship should be mirror symmetry be-
tween the topological A- and B-models. Holomorphic Chern-Simons theory lives on
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                             9


a space-filling brane in the topological B-model, and this brane is converted under T-
duality to a 3-dimensional brane in the topological A-model. Ordinary Chern-Simons
theory is the field theory living on a brane in the topological A-model, and thus is the
T-dual.

   We also consider a variant of BCOV theory which we call (1, 0) BCOV theory, only
in three complex dimensions. We conjecture that free (1, 0) BCOV theory is the holo-
morphic twist of the free (1, 0) tensor multiplet. We will show that (1, 0) BCOV theory
can be coupled to sl( N | N ) holomorphic Chern-Simons theory and that the coupled
theory admits a unique quantization. Davide Gaiotto suggested that the following
might be true.

Conjecture. Consider a single M5 brane on R7 × (R4 /Z N ), where the M5 brane lives at
the singular point in the A N singularity and spans 6 of the 7 directions in R6 .

  There is a theory with (1, 0) supersymmetry living on the world-volume of this M5 brane
[GT14]. Then, the conjecture is that the holomorphic twist of this theory is (1, 0) BCOV theory
coupled to sl( N | N ) holomorphic Chern-Simons theory.

   Let’s present some evidence for this conjecture. Standard M-theory philosophy says
that M-theory on R7 × (R4 /Zk ) is equivalent to 7-dimensional maximally supersym-
metric gauge theory with group SU (k ). The M5 brane can be viewed as a domain
wall from the 7d gauge theory to itself. Further, the motion of the M5 brane is de-
scribed by a (1, 0) tensor multiplet on the brane, and after twisting should produce
the fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory. The two copies of the gauge theory living on each
side of the M5 brane have a boundary condition on the brane, which is (conjecturally)
the same as the one discussed earlier which introduces holomorphic Chern-Simons.
In this way, we find that the theory on the M5 brane is, after taking Q-cohomology,
sl(k | k ) holomorphic Chern-Simons coupled to (1, 0) BCOV theory.


1.4. The fields of BCOV theory. Let us now introduce the fields of BCOV theory,
focusing on dimension 3 for simplicity.

   Let Ω−∗,∗ (C3 ) denote the space of differential forms on C3 , with degrees arranged
so that a ( p, q) form is in degree q − p. The fields of BCOV theory, in our formulation,
can be identified with
                                     Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][−1]
10                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


where t is a formal variable of cohomological degree 2. The symbol [−1] indicates a
shift of cohomological degrees, so that ω ∈ Ω p,q (C3 ), then the field tk ω is in degree
2k + q − p + 1. The linearized BRST differential on the space of fields of BCOV theory
is the operator ∂ + t∂.

   It is often more convenient to identify the fields of BCOV theory with polyvector
fields, which are isomorphic to forms. For now, however, since we will not yet be
discussing the interaction in BCOV theory, we will stick to forms.

     In the original formulation, the fields of BCOV theory is the space

                                  Ker ∂ ⊂ Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[−1].

In particular, the fields contain a closed (2, 1)-form of cohomological degree 0, corre-
sponding to a variation of complex structure. The variable t that we introduce plays
the role of descendants. The fact that the linearized BRST operator includes the term
t∂ in our formulation replaces the fact that in the original formulation the space of
fields is Ker ∂.

  We formulate BCOV theory in the BV formalism, in which to specify a theory one
needs to specify a differential graded manifold with an odd symplectic structure.
BCOV theory is a degenerate theory in this sense: the space of fields has an odd Pois-
son, as opposed to odd symplectic, structure. The Poisson kernel is

                                     π = (∂ ⊗ 1)δDiag

where δDiag is the delta-function on the diagonal in C3 × C3 . Thus, δDiag is a form on
C3 × C3 with distributional coefficients.

   This Poisson kernel lives in the tensor square of the space of fields. In fact, it lives
in the tensor square of the subspace of fields which have no powers of t in them.

  Although this is a very abstract way of formulating a theory, one can still construct
familiar objects such as the propagator in this formalism. The propagator is
                                             −1
                                   P = (∂∂        ⊗ 1)δDiag
          −1                                                  −1   ∗
where ∂ is the inverse to the ∂ operator. (Explicitly, ∂ = ∂ 4−1 where 4−1 is the
Green’s operator for the Laplacian). The descendant fields – those involving powers
of t – do not propagate, and thus can be viewed as background fields. Including
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                           11


descendant fields is natural for various reasons, and is especially important away from
dimension 3.

  A variant of our BCOV theory which is very close to the original formulation is
obtained if one only considers those fields in Ωk,∗ tl where k + l ≤ 3. Fields of this
nature form a subcomplex of the full space of fields we wrote above, and contain all
the propagating fields. This smaller space of fields can be viewed as a direct sum of 4
complexes of the form
                              Ωi,∗ −
                                   → tΩi+1,∗ . . . −
                                                   → t3−i Ω3,∗
                                    ∂                    ∂


where 0 ≤ i ≤ 3.

   These complexes can be viewed as resolutions of the subspace Ker ∂ ⊂ Ωi,∗ , so that
this smaller space of fields is a resolution of the space of fields of the original BCOV
theory.

  The remainder of the space of fields of BCOV theory consists of infinitely many
copies of the de Rham complex of the form

                        tk Ω0,∗ → tk+1 Ω1,∗ → tk+2 Ω2,∗ → tk+3 Ω3,∗

where k ≥ 1. These fields do not propagate, but do interact. They can thus be seen as
background fields, and by setting these background fields to zero one obtains a quan-
tization of the smaller space of fields. These background fields are not essential for the
purposes of this paper. We include, them, however, because they play an important
role in our approach to a holomorphic twist of the AdS/CFT correspondence, which
we will discuss in future work.


1.5. Holomorphic Chern-Simons. The fundamental field of holomorphic Chern-Simons
theory is a connection A ∈ Ω0,1 (C3 , gl N ) with action
                                         Z
                                                  1          1      3
                           ShCS ( A) =            2 Tr A∂A + 3 Tr( A ).
                                             C3

The integration is again the standard holomorphic volume form on C3 . The field A is
acted on by the complex gauge group of maps from C3 to GL(n, C), and this action
preserves ShCS . In the BV formalism, the space of fields (including ghosts, anti-fields
etc.) is Ω0,∗ (C3 ) ⊗ gl N [1], and the full BV action functional takes the same form as ShCS
above, except that now A is no longer constrained to be a (0, 1)-form.
12                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


  We will denote the cubic term in the holomorphic Chern-Simons interaction by I CS ;
we should think of it as being associated to a disc with three marked points on the
boundary.

   One can couple BCOV theory and holomorphic Chern-Simons. We are only inter-
ested, for now, in the term in the coupled action which depends linearly on the fields
of BCOV theory. We call this term I 1−disk , and view it as being associated to a disc with
one marked point in the middle (at which we put the field of BCOV theory) and any
number of marked points on the boundary.

   The explicit formula for I 1−disk is a little complicated (see Definition 3.1.3). To get a
sense of its structure, we give here some expressions for the coupling between those
fields on BCOV theory which are of cohomological degree zero and holomorphic
Chern-Simons.

     (1) If α ∈ Ω3,2 (C3 ), then α couples to holomorphic Chern-Simons via the interac-
         tion                                Z
                                      A 7→          α Tr A.

     (2) If α ∈ Ω2,1 (C3 ) with ∂α = 0, then α couples by the interaction
                                               Z
                                   A 7→ 12         α Tr( A∂A).

     (3) A field α ∈ Ω1,0 (C3 ) with ∂α = 0 couples via
                                           Z
                                 A 7→ 31       α Tr( A(∂A)2 ).

     (4) A field α ∈ tΩ3,0 (C3 ) couples by
                                               Z
                                    A 7→ 13         α Tr( A3 ).


1.6. (1, 0) BCOV theory. Let X be a Calabi-Yau 3-fold. The fields of (1, 0) BCOV the-
ory are the subset of those fields of the full BCOV theory consisting of the complex

                                     Ω2,∗ [1] −
                                              → tΩ3,∗ .
                                                   ∂


The fields of ghost number zero are Ω2,1 ⊕ tΩ3,0 , and these fields couple to those of
holomorphic Chern-Simons theory for sl( N | N ) by the formulae we wrote down
above.
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                         13


  We can rewrite these fields in terms of holomorphic vector fields on X. Contracting
with the holomorphic volume form gives an isomorphism between the spaces

                      Ω0,∗ ( X, TX ) ∼
                                     = Ω2,∗ ( X ),     Ω0,∗ ( X ) ∼
                                                                  = Ω3,∗ ( X ).
It allows us to rewrite our space of fields as

                                 Ω0,∗ ( X, TX )[1] ⊕ Ω0,∗ ( X ).

The differential is a sum of the ∂ operator and the holomorphic divergence map

                             ∂ = Div : Ω0,k ( X, TX ) → Ω0,k ( X ).

In this formulation, fields of cohomological degree zero are Ω0,1 ( X, TX ), describing
deformations of complex structure; and Ω0,0 ( X ), describing changes in the holomor-
phic volume form. The fields of cohomological degree −1 (i.e. ghosts) are Ω0,0 ( X, TX ).
These are ghosts for holomorphic changes of coordinates.

  Let us describe the interaction for (1, 0) BCOV theory. If α denotes the field in
Ω0,∗ ( X, TX )[1] and φ ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X ), the interaction is
                                                Z
                              I (α, φ) = ∑ 16        φn Ω ∧ (α `)3 Ω
                                         n ≥0

where Ω is the holomorphic volume form, and (α `)3 indicates the operation of con-
tracting with α 3 times.

   One can show that the equations of motion (including the linearized BRST operator
we have discussed) describe the variations of X as a Calabi-Yau manifold equipped
with a holomorphic volume form. This is in contrast to the full BCOV theory, in which
the equations of motion describe a much larger space including non-commutative de-
formations of X.

   We conjecture that free (1, 0) BCOV theory is the holomorphic twist of the free (1, 0)
tensor multiplet in 6 dimensions. The idea is that the propagating field of ghost num-
ber zero (1, 0) BCOV theory that lives in Ω2,1 corresponds to 9 of the 10 components
of the self-dual 3-form in the (1, 0) tensor multiplet.

  Our theorem regarding quantization of (1, 0) BCOV theory is the following.

Theorem. There is a unique quantization of (1, 0) BCOV theory coupled to sl(k | k ) holomor-
phic Chern-Simons theory, and compatible with certain natural symmetries, in the following
situations:
14                                       KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


      (1) On C3 .
      (2) On a Calabi-Yau X which is the total space of the canonical bundle of a complex surface.
      (3) On the product of a K3 surface with an elliptic curve.
      (4) At genus 0, on any Calabi-Yau. From the point of view of the holomorphic Chern-
          Simons gauge theory, genus 0 means we only consider planar diagrams.

1.7. The interaction between general BCOV fields and holomorphic Chern-Simons.
We will sketch the cohomology cancellation argument which allows us to quantize
open-closed BCOV theory. To understand this argument, it is useful to have some
understanding of how a general field of BCOV theory couples to holomorphic Chern-
Simons (although we will not give explicit formulae right now).

   Let’s consider the most general possible single-trace Lagrangian we can write down
which is a first order deformation of the holomorphic Chern-Simons interaction. If we
require our Lagrangian to be GL( N | N ) invariant and compatible with the inclusions
gl( N | N ) ,→ gl( N + k | N + k ), then the general Lagrangian is a sum of terms of the
form
                     Z
(†)
                         C3
                              ∏ dzi ∏ dzi α Tr (( D0 Ar )( D1 Ar ) . . . ( Dn Ar ))
                                                         0        1            n


where α ∈ C ∞ (C3 ), 0 ≤ ri ≤ 3, Ari indicates the component of the field A in Ω0,ri , and
each Di is a constant-coefficient differential operator from Ω0,ri (C3 ) to C ∞ (C3 ). Up to
integration by parts, we can assume D0 is a linear map without any derivatives.

   The space of such Lagrangians is a cochain complex with a differential given by
{ShCS , −} where {−, −} is the BV bracket. Consistent first-order deformations of the
holomorphic Chern-Simons action are given by closed elements of this cochain com-
plex, and cohomologous elements define equivalent first-order deformations. A re-
sult of Tsygan [Tsy83] and Loday-Quillen [LQ84] allows us to identify this complex
of Lagrangians with the (local) cyclic cochain complex of the dg algebra Ω0,∗ (C3 ). It
is important here that we are working uniformly in the N appearings in gl( N | N ).
Because of this, trace relations do not appear, and expressions like (†) give the same
Lagrangian if they are related by a cyclic permutation or a total derivative, which is
why one finds the cyclic cochain complex.

  A classic result of Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg allows one to calculate this local
cyclic complex, and one finds that it is quasi-isomorphic to the complex Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][−1],
with differential ∂ + t∂. This, however, is the complex of fields of BCOV theory.
                      QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                         15


   In other words, the fields of BCOV theory are the universal object which can couple
to holomorphic Chern-Simons theory with single-trace operators.



1.8. The cohomology cancellation argument. Recall that we are aiming to couple
our open-closed BCOV theory where on the open string sector we have the groups
gl( N | N ), and we work uniformly in N. The fact that we are working uniformly in N
implies that Feynman diagrams for the open sector can be viewed as ribbon graphs,
and that more generally every Feynman diagram for the open-closed theory gives us
a topological type of a Riemann surface of some genus g, with some number h of
boundary components, some number n of interior marked points, and some number
of marked points on each boundary component. The closed-string fields are placed on
the interior marked points and the open-string fields on the boundary marked points.
The fact that we are using the super Lie algebras gl( N | N ) instead of gl( N ) tells us
that only surfaces each of whose boundary components has at least one marked points
can appear.

  It is important to bear in mind that we introduce Riemann surfaces only as a com-
binatorial tool for describing topological types of Feynman diagrams. We are strictly
doing string field theory, and we will not use the world-sheet theory at all.

   It makes sense to try to consider our theory up to genus G, by only considering
diagrams of genus less than G. Also, given an integer R, it makes sense to consider
our theory where we consider diagrams of genus g < G, of genus G where h + n <
R. Recall h is the number of boundary components and n the number of interior
marked points. We will indicate this by saying that ( g, h + n) < ( G, R) using the
lexicographical ordering on pairs of integers.

   Our construction of the open-closed theory is by induction. Suppose we have con-
structed our theory for ( g, h, n) where ( g, h + n) < ( G, R). Then, we will construct it
for ( g, h, n) < ( G, R + 1) by induction. The obstruction-deformation group describing
this problem is built from Lagrangians defined on the open-closed fields which, on the
open sector, have h traces, and which are homogeneous of degree n as a function of
the closed-string fields, where h + n = R.

  The main claim is that this complex vanishes. Let us illustrate this point for the
simple case when R = 1.
16                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   In this case, our complex has two terms: single-trace Lagrangians of the open-string
fields, and linear functionals of the closed-string fields. The differential on this com-
plex has three terms: the open-string BRST differential, which acts only on the open-
string sector; the closed-string BRST differential, acting on the closed-string sector;
and the BV bracket with the interaction I 1−disk . This last term maps a linear functional
of the closed-string fields to a single-trace functional of the open-string fields.

   As we have sketched above, single-trace first-order deformations of the open-string
sector are described by the cyclic cohomology of the algebra Ω0,∗ (C3 ), which is pre-
cisely the complex Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][−1] of fields of the closed-string sector.

   The space of linear functionals of the closed string fields is t−1 Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[t−1 ]. The
pairing between an element φ ∈ t−1 Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[t−1 ][−1] and a closed-string field α ∈
Ω−∗
  c
    ,∗
       (C3 )[[t]][−1] is
                                                Z
                                 φ(α) = ∑           φ−k−1 ∧ αk
                                         k ≥0


where φl and αl indicate the coefficient of tl . The differential ∂ + t∂ on Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[t−1 ]
is the dual to the differential ∂ + t∂ on Ω−∗,∗, (C3 )[[t]]. We use the convention that t∂
applied to φ−1 t−1 is zero.

     Thus, our obstruction-deformation group looks like

                      Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][−1] ⊕ t−1 Ω−,∗,∗ (C3 )[t−1 ][−1]

where the first summand comes from the open-string sector, and the second from the
closed-string sector. Using the language of cyclic cohomology, we can say that the
obstruction-deformation complex for the open string sector yields local cyclic cochain
complex of Ω0,∗ (C3 ), whereas that for the closed string sector yields negative local
cyclic complex.

   Our obstruction-deformation complex is almost the complex Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )((t))[−1] with
differential ∂ + t∂. The only issue is that we are missing the term in the differential
which sends a closed–string Lagrangian φt−1 to the open-string Lagrangian ∂φt0 . In
the cyclic cohomology language, our complex is almost the periodic cyclic cochain
complex, except that we are missing the connecting map between negative cyclic
cochains and cyclic cochains.
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                  17


   There is a remaining term in the differential, which maps the closed-string to the
open-string sectors, coming from the closed-string BV bracket with the interaction
term I 1−disk .

   We calculate that this differential is precisely the missing term mentioned above, so
that the full obstruction-deformation complex is Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )((t))[−1] with differential
∂ + t∂ (that is, the period cyclic cochain complex). This complex is simply a direct sum
of infinitely many copies of the de Rham complex of C3 , of the form
               Ω0,∗ (C3 )tk → Ω1,∗ (C3 )tk+1 → Ω2,∗ (C3 )tk+2 → Ω3,∗ (C3 )tk+3
As such, the cohomology is simply C((t))[−1].

   What this shows is that, although if we concentrate on the purely open or purely
closed string sectors there are lots of complicated possible Lagrangians, for the cou-
pled theory every Lagrangian is equivalent to a sum of the simple ones corresponding
to the elements in tk 1 ∈ Ω0,0 (C3 )((t)). A similar calculation applies when R > 1,
except that we find the space of possible Lagrangians is isomorphic to a symmetric
power of C((t))[−1].

   The Lagrangians corresponding to tk 1 have very simple descriptions. If k ≥ 0, then
this Lagrangian is a function of the open-string fields A ∈ Ω0,∗ (C3 , gl( N | N )) of the
form                                          Z
                A 7→       ∑       cl1 ,l2 ,l3 Tr Al1 (∂A) Al2 (∂A) Al3 (∂A)
                          l1 +l2 +l3 =2k +1
where cl1 ,l2 ,l3 are certain combinatorial constants.

   If k < 0, then the Lagrangian corresponding to tk 1 is a function of the closed-string
field φ ∈ Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][−1] of the form
                                                      Z
                                      φ = ∑ t φk 7→
                                              k
                                                          φ−k−1 .

There are similar expressions when R > 1.

  In either case, we see that the Lagrangian is invariant under scaling of C3 . In topo-
logical string theory, one expects quantities associated to surfaces of type ( g, h, n) to
have weight3 3(2 − 2g − h − n) when we scale C3 , and we can make this into a consis-
tent axiom for quantum open-closed BCOV theory.
  3Whether the weight is 3(2g − 2 + h + n) or 3(2g − 2 + h) is convention dependent. If one thinks of

the fields of BCOV theory as being polyvector fields, then the weight is 2g − 2 + h, and if one thinks
18                                   KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   It follows that the Lagrangians we have found do not scale correctly to contribute to
the obstruction-deformation complex for quantizing open-closed BCOV theory (in a
way compatible with scaling of C3 ), except when 2g − 2 + h + n = 0. From this we see
that once we have specified the quantum theory for all diagrams with 2g − 2 + h + n =
0, the axioms specify the rest of the theory uniquely.

   If 2g − 2 + h + n = 0, then we have either a disc with one interior marked point,
an annulus with no interior marked points, or a torus with no interior marked points.
The disc with one interior marked point has already been specified. The torus with no
interior marked points does not appear in our story, as we do not consider “vacuum”
Feynman diagrams with no external lines whatsoever. It follows that it remains to
construct the theory at the annulus level.

   A similar cohomology cancellation holds when we consider (1, 0) BCOV theory,
allowing us to quantize this theory to all loops once we have quantized to the annulus
level.



1.9. Annulus anomaly cancellation. The final thing to check for our argument is that
we can construct the theory at the annulus level. The cohomology cancellation argu-
ment we sketched above does not apply at the annulus level. One reason, of course,
is that the possible Lagrangians we found are of weight zero and so can contribute
to annulus diagrams. There is a more subtle reason, however. The cohomology can-
cellation was between various possible Lagrangians appearing at ( g, h, n) for fixed g
and fixed h + n. If we try to apply this at g = 0 and h + n = 2, we find that we have
already specified (as part of our classical data) what happens when ( g, h, n) is (0, 1, 1)
and ( g, h, n) = (0, 0, 2). (The latter should be thought as kinetic term in the classical
BCOV action, encoded above by the linearized BRST operator). Lagrangians corre-
sponding to these two types of surface can not appear in our obstruction-deformation
complex, so that the complex is entirely built from Lagrangians of type (0, 2, 0). The
cancellation described above therefore can not take place.

  We can explicitly compute possible anomalies to quantization at the annulus level.
There are two possible anomalies, corresponding to the functionals of the open string


of them as forms the weight is 3(2g − 2 + h + n). The difference is accounted for by the fact that the
isomorphism between forms and polyvector fields depends linearly on the holomorphic volume form.
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                          19


field A ∈ Ω0,∗ (C3 , gl( N | N )):
                                                Z
                                α1 ( A ) =               Tr A∂A Tr ∂( A)2
                                                    C3
                                                Z
                                α2 ( A ) =               Tr A Tr(∂A)3 .
                                                    C3

There are no ambiguities to quantization at the annulus level, so that if the anomaly
vanishes the quantization is unique.

  If we try to quantize holomorphic Chern-Simons on its own, without coupling to
BCOV theory, we find (by an explicit computation) that the anomaly is α1 /2 + α2 .

   There is another possible source of annulus anomalies, however, coming from the
closed-string sector. The Lagrangian I 1−disk couples the open and closed string sectors,
and corresponds to a disk with one interior marked point. Applying the closed-string
BV anti-bracket { I 1−disk , I 1−disk }C also gives an annulus-level anomaly, which we call
the closed-string anomaly.

Theorem. The open and closed string anomalies precisely cancel for BCOV theory on Cd
(where d is odd). Therefore, there is a unique quantum open-closed BCOV theory to all orders.

   The fact that the quantization at the annulus level gives one to all orders follows
from the cohomology cancellation argument we sketched earlier.

 If we use gl( N ) instead of gl( N | N ), there is an extra one-loop open-string anomaly
which is the functional of the open-string field
                                            Z
                                     A 7→            Tr A(∂A)3 Tr 1.
                                                C3

Of course, Tr 1 is N if we use gl( N ) but zero for gl( N | N ). This extra term corresponds
to an annulus with no marked points on one of its two boundaries. This term does not
cancel with the closed-string sector.

  We also have the following variant, for (1, 0) BCOV theory.

Theorem. The annulus anomaly cancels if we couple (1, 0) BCOV theory to sl( N | N )
holomorphic Chern-Simons on any Calabi-Yau manifold of dimension 3.

   As a corollary, (1, 0) open-closed BCOV theory admits a unique quantization on C3 , and
indeed on any Calabi-Yau which is the total space of the canonical bundle over a complex
20                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


surface. (The cohomology cancellation argument we discussed earlier works on this class of
Calabi-Yaus).

   The point here is the following. If we use sl( N | N ) holomorphic Chern-Simons, the
term in the anomaly of the form Tr A Tr (∂A)3 is zero, and the anomaly is simply
                                  R                  

  Tr( A∂A) Tr (∂A)2 .
R                     


  In the fields of BCOV theory, Ω2,∗ couples to 2 copies of A, Ω1,∗ to 3 copies of A and
Ω3,∗ to 1 copy of A. If Ik1−disk refers to the term in I 1−disk where on the interior marked
point one places a field of BCOV theory in t0 Ωk,∗ , then one finds that
                                                   Z
                    { I31−disk , I11−disk }C ( A) = Tr A Tr (∂A)3
                                                                  

                                                      Z
                    { I21−disk , I21−disk }C ( A) =       Tr( A∂A) Tr (∂A)2 .
                                                                           


The only propagating fields in (1, 0) BCOV theory are in Ω2,∗ , so the closed-string
anomaly here is { I21−disk , I21−disk }C , which cancels the anomaly from the open-string
sector using sl( N | N ).

   This annulus anomaly cancellation is very similar to the way that the introduction
of (1, 0) tensor multiplets can cancel a one-loop anomaly appearing in a 6 dimensional
gauge theory with (1, 0) supersymmetries.


1.10. The classical BCOV interaction. One slightly odd feature of our construction
of open-closed BCOV theory is that our initial data, from which we produce the en-
tire quantum theory in a unique way, does not include the BCOV interaction. Recall
that our initial data is I disk and I 1−disk , corresponding to disks with zero and one in-
terior marked points. From this, we generate by the arguments sketched above the
full quantum open-closed BCOV theory, and in particular the closed-string interac-
tions I n−sphere associated to a sphere with n marked points. In this subsection we will
describe a conjectural description for these closed-string interactions, and relate it to
Kontsevich’s formality theorem.

   It is convenient to rewrite the fields of BCOV theory in terms of polyvector fields,
as this makes it easier to describe our conjectural formula for the interaction.

     Let
                               PV∗,∗ (C3 ) = Ω0,∗ (C3 , ∧∗ TC3 )
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                21


                                                  = C ∞ (C3 )[dzi , ∂z j ]
be the Dolbeault complex of C3 with coefficients in the bundle of poly-vector fields,
which is the exterior algebra of the tangent bundle. The variables dzi and ∂z j are odd,
of cohomological degree 1.

  Let PVi,j (C3 ) denote Ω0,j (C3 , ∧i TC3 ). There is an isomorphism

                                     PVi,j (C3 ) ∼
                                                 = Ω3−i,j (C3 )
coming from the isomorphism of holomorphic bundles

                                         ∧i TC3 ∼
                                                = ∧3−i T ∗ C3
given by contracting with the holomorphic volume form.

   The space of polyvector fields has two operators ∂ and ∂, which correspond via the
isomorphism with the de Rham complex to the usual ∂ and ∂ operators. Thus, ∂ maps
PVi,j to PVi,j+1 and ∂ maps PVi,j to PVi−1,j .

  In the language of polyvector fields, the space of fields of BCOV theory is

                            PV∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][2] ∼
                                                = Ω−∗,∗ (C3 )[[t]][−1].
with differential ∂ + t∂.

  There is an integration map
                                         Z
                                             : PV∗c ,∗ (C3 ) → C

                          c , and which sends α ∈ PVc (C ) to
which is zero except on PV3,3                       3,3 3
                                     Z            Z
                                         α :=              Ω ∧ ( α ` Ω ).
                                                      C3

Here Ω = dz1 dz2 dz3 , and α ` Ω ∈ Ω0,3 is the form obtained by contracting α with Ω.

 In [CL12] we described a classical interaction for our formulation of BCOV theory,
which we now recall. Define functionals

                                    In : PV∗c ,∗ (C3 )[[t]][2] → C

as follows. If α ∈ PV∗c ,∗ (C3 )[[t]][2], let αk denote the coefficient of tk . Then, we set
                                                    ( n − 3) !
                                                                      Z
                  In (α) =              ∑          k ! . . . kn !
                                                                          αk1 ∧ · · · ∧ αk n .
                           k ,...,k n with ∑ k =n−3 1
                              1               i
22                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


We then define the interaction I by saying that

                                      I (α) = ∑ n!1 In (α).
                                               n ≥3

One can check [CL12] that I (α) satisfies the classical master equation.

   In this paper, we show that there is a unique quantum open-closed BCOV theory.
When restricted to the classical closed-string sector this gives us some new interaction
for BCOV theory, which we call b  I. Again, we can expand

                                       I (α) = ∑ n!1 b
                                       b             In (α)
                                               n ≥3

where b In (α) is homogeneous of degree n as a function of α. The functional b
                                                                             I automat-
ically satisfies the classical master equation.

Conjecture. The functionals I and Ib are equivalent solutions to the classical master equation.

   This conjecture is certainly not obvious. In fact, it implies a variant of Kontsevich’s
formality theorem:

Proposition. This conjecture implies the holomorphic analog of Willwacher-Calaque’s cyclic
refinement of Kontsevich’s formality theorem.

   As stated, it implies the 3-dimensional version of the cyclic formality theorem, but
since our construction of open-closed BCOV theory works in any odd dimension the
obvious refinement of the conjecture implies Willwacher-Calaque’s theorem in any
odd dimension.

     Even though we can’t currently prove our conjecture, we can show the following.

Lemma. The cubic interactions I3 and b
                                     I3 are equivalent solutions of the classical master equa-
tion modulo quartic terms.

                                                                                    I
  In other words, to leading order, the dynamically-generated classical interaction b
and our BCOV action I do agree.

     For (1, 0) BCOV theory, we can obtain stronger results.

Theorem. On any Calabi-Yau 3-fold X, the dynamically-generated classical interaction J is
equivalent to the classical interaction I which is the restriction of the interaction from the full
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                          23


BCOV theory to the fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory. (The interaction I is the one we wrote down
explicitly earlier).

1.11. Acknowledgements. K.C. is grateful to Davide Gaiotto, Jaume Gomes and Ed-
ward Witten for helpful conversations.

  Part of this work was done during visits of S.L. to the Perimeter Institute, which also
supports the research of K.C. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported by the Gov-
ernment of Canada through Industry Canada and by the Province of Ontario through
the Ministry of Economic Development and Innovation.


                      2. H OLOMORPHIC C HERN -S IMONS THEORY

   Let us now start on the technical material in the paper. We will begin with a discus-
sion of how to describe gl N gauge theories uniformly in N.


2.1. Invariant functions for gl N gauge theory. Let V be a graded topological vector
space, V ∨ be its continuous dual, gl N be the Lie algebra of N × N matrices. We are
interested in holomorphic Chern-Simons type theory whose space of fields is repre-
sented by V ⊗ gl N .

  Let us first introduce some notation for functions on V ⊗ gl N . Let
                                                  >0
                            O (V ⊗ gl N ) = Sym
                                            d          (V ∨ ⊗ gl∨N )
denote the graded algebra of formal power series on V ⊗ gl N modulo constants. The
component Symk (V ∨ ⊗ gl∨N ) will be called homogeneous of degree k. The group GL N
acts on V ⊗ gl N via its adjoint representation on gl N . It induces a natural GL N action
on O (V ⊗ gl N ) via duality.

  For M < N, we have an embedding V ⊗ gl M ,→ V ⊗ gl N induced by
                                                 !
                                             A 0
                         gl M ,→ gl N , A →        .
                                             0 0
Let
                             M : O (V ⊗ gl N ) → O (V ⊗ gl M )
                            iN
be the restriction map associated to this embedding.
24                                       KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


2.1.1 Definition. Let
                                    { f N ∈ O (V ⊗ gl N ) | N ∈ Z>0 }
be a collection consisting of a function on V ⊗ gl N for each N. We say this collection of
functions is admissible if

      (1) Equivariance: each f N is GL N -invariant.
      (2) Compatibility: i N
                           M fN = f M.


We let Oadm (V ⊗ gl∞ ) denote the admissible collection of functionals, which is a bi-graded
commutative non-unital algebra (the cohomology degree inherited from V and the homoge-
neous degree).

Example 2.1. Let V = C. Then the collection of functionals f N ∈ O (gl N ) defined by
                                      f N ( A) = Tr( Ak ),             A ∈ gl N
is admissible and homogeneous of degree k.

Example 2.2. Let V = C[1], so V is concentrated on degree −1. Let e ∈ V denote the
generator. Then the collection of functionals f N ∈ O (gl N [1]) defined by
                                      f N (eA) = Tr( Ak ),             A ∈ gl N
is admissible and homogeneous of degree k, which vanishes if k is even.


     More generally, if V is a graded vector space, let σ denote the cyclic permutation
      σ : V ⊗k → V ⊗k ,      σ(v1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ vk ) = (−1)|vk |(|v1 |+···+|vk−1 |) vk ⊗ v1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ vk−1 ,
where |v| denotes the degree of v ∈ V. Let
                                                                          σ
                                                                      ⊗k
                                           Cyck (V ) = V

denote the space of cyclically invariant elements of V ⊗k , and let
                                                             M
                                         Cyc(V ) =                  Cyck (V )
                                                             k ≥1

be the graded vector space of cyclically invariant tensors on V. There is a natural map
                                    Symk (V ⊗ gl N ) → Cyck (V ),
by assigning
( v 0 ⊗ A 0 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ ( v k −1 ⊗ A k −1 ) →     ∑ ±v0 ⊗ (vs(1) ) · · · ⊗ (vs(k−1) ) Tr( A0 As(1) · · · As(k−1) ),
                                                s ∈ S k −1
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                25


where the sign ± is given by permuting the graded objects vi ⊗ Ai . Dually, we obtain
a natural map
                              Cyck (V )∨ 7→ O (V ⊗ gl∞ )
by a sequence of functionals φN ∈ O (V ⊗ gl N ) from φ ∈ Cyck (V )∨ such that for a
decomposable tensor v ⊗ A ∈ V ⊗ gl N ,
                                                1
                               φN (v ⊗ A) =       φ(v⊗k ) Tr( Ak ).
                                                k
This map extends by linearity to a map
(†)                      Cyc(V )∨ = ∏ Cyck (V )∨ → O (V ⊗ gl∞ ).
                                      k ≥1


                    d >0 (Cyc(V )∨ ) denote the completed non-unital symmetric al-
  Let O (Cyc(V )) = Sym
gebra on the dual Cyc(V )∨ , viewed as formal functions on Cyc(V ) modulo constants.

2.1.2 Lemma. The map (†) extends to an isomorphism of bi-graded algebras
                               O (Cyc(V )) → Oadm (V ⊗ gl∞ ).

Proof. By classical invariant theory for GL N , for N sufficient large (N ≥ k),
                                                                                       
  Symk (V ∨ ⊗ gl∨N )GL N ≃ ((V ∨ )⊗k ⊗ (gl∨N )⊗k )Sk        ≃ ((V ∨ )⊗k ⊗ (gl∨N )⊗k )GL N
                                                       GL N                                 Sk
                                              
                        ≃ (V ∨ ) ⊗ k ⊗ C[ Sk ]   .
                                                Sk

It follows that                                              
                        Oadm (V ⊗ gl∞ ) ≃ ∏ (V ∨ )⊗k ⊗ C[Sk ]   .
                                                                      Sk
                                             k ≥1
Let σk ⊂ Sk be the conjugacy class of the cycle (12 · · · k ). Since any permutation is a
product of cycles, the natural map
                                                    !
                 >0
                                                                              
            Sym
             d        ∏    ( V ∨
                                 ) ⊗ k
                                       ⊗ C [ σk ]
                                                    Sk
                                                      → ∏   ( V ∨ ⊗k
                                                                 )   ⊗ C [ S k ]
                                                                                Sk
                        k ≥1                             k ≥1

is an isomorphism. The lemma follows from the observation
                                                       
                          Cyc∨k ≃   ( V ∨ ⊗k
                                         )   ⊗ C [ σk ]
                                                                Sk

and the direct check that the above identifications lead to (†) .                                

2.1.3 Definition. An admissible function f = { f N } is said to have weight k is f ∈ Symk (Cyc(V )∨ )
under the isomorphism in Lemma 2.1.2.
26                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


2.2. Invariant functions and the cyclic cochain complex. Now let us consider the
above situation in the case that V = A[1] where A is a differential graded alge-
bra. Then, the graded space O ( A ⊗ gl N [1]) has a natural differential, which is the
Chevalley-Eilenberg differential dCE for the dg Lie algebra A ⊗ gl N .

    If { f N } ∈ O ( A ⊗ gl N [1]) is a collection of admissible functions, then so is {dCE f N }.
It follows that the space Oadm ( A ⊗ gl∞ [1]) has a differential for which the map
                    Oadm ( A ⊗ gl∞ [1]) → O ( A ⊗ gl N [1]) = C ∗ ( A ⊗ gl N )
is a cochain map.

Theorem (Tsygan [Tsy83], Loday-Quillen [LQ84]). There is an isomorphism of cochain
complexes
                   Oadm ( A ⊗ gl∞ [1]) ∼ d >0 (CC ∗ ( A)[1]) .
                                       = Sym

  Here CC ∗ ( A) is the cyclic cochain complex of A. In the notation above, CC ∗ ( A) is
Cyc( A)∨ [−1] equipped with a Hochschild-type differential.

2.3. A supergroup generalization. For our application, we need a variant of the above
construction for the super Lie algebra gl( N | N ), which is the graded Lie algebra of
endomorphisms of the graded vector space C N | N = C N ⊕ C N [1].

  Given a graded vector space V, the admissible functions on V ⊗ gl( N | N ) is defined
the same as before by a sequence of functions f N ∈ O (V ⊗ gl( N | N )) such that

     (1) Each f N is gl( N | N )-invariant.
     (2) There is a natural inclusion gl( N | N ) ,→ gl( N + k | N + k ) where gl( N | N )
         consists of those matrices acting on C N | N ⊕ Ck|k which preserve C N | N and act
         by zero on Ck|k . We let i N
                                    N +k
                                         denote the corresponding restriction map O (V ⊗
         gl( N + k | N + k )) → O (V ⊗ gl( N | N ). We require that i N
                                                                      N +k
                                                                           f N +k = f N .

We let Oadm (V ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)) denote the space of admissible sequences of functions.

2.3.1 Lemma. Exactly as in the gl( N ) case, there is a natural isomorphism
                            O (Cyc(V )) ∼
                                        = Oadm (V ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)).
In particular, we find a natural isomorphism
                         Oadm (V ⊗ gl(∞)) ∼
                                          = Oadm (V ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)).
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                            27


Proof. We will define a map
                           O (Cyc(W )) → Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞))
and the image of this will be the admissible functionals.

  The map is very simple. If e1 , . . . , en : W → C then we will construct a functional
                            f e1 ⊗···⊗en : (W ⊗ gl( N | N ))⊗n → C
by saying that
             f e1 ⊗···⊗en (w1 ⊗ A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ wn ⊗ An ) = ∏ ei (wi ) Tr( A1 . . . An ).
Here we take the trace in the defining representation of gl( N | N ). Projecting onto the
symmetric tensors on the dual of W ⊗ gl( N | N ) makes f e1 ⊗···⊗en into an element of
(Symn W ⊗ gl( N | N ))∨ .

  Since this map does not change (except by the appropriate sign) if we cyclically
permute the ei , we thus get a map

                            ∏ cycn (W )∨ → O (W ⊗ gl( N | N ))
                             n
and so a map of commutative algebras
                            O (Cyc(W )) → O (W ⊗ gl( N | N )).
The image is certainly admissible, so we get the desired map from O (Cyc(W )) to
Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)).

   Next we need to check that this map is an isomorphism. The map is clearly injective,
so it suffices to check that it is surjective onto the space of gl( N | N )-invariant func-
tions on W ⊗ gl( N | N ). But, as in the gl( N ) case, this follows immediately from in-
variant theory for the super group [Ser01]. The statement we need (proved in [Ser01])
is the following. Let V = C N | N denote the defining representation of gl( N | N ). Then,
the space of gl( N | N ) invariants in a tensor power V ⊗ p ⊗ (V ⊗q )∗ is non-zero unless
p = q. If p = q, then the invariants have the following description. Let c ∈ V ⊗ V ∗
denote the matrix for the identity map from V to V. For each permutation σ ∈ S p we
have an element
                                               p
                                       cσ = ⊗i=1 ci,σ(i)
where ci,σ(i) refers to c placed on the i’th tensor factor of V ⊗ p and the σ(i ) tensor factor
of (V ∗ )⊗ p . Then, the elements cσ span the space of invariants. (In the gl( N ) case
invariant tensors have exactly the same description).
28                                 KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


     The proof from the gl( N ) case now applies.                                              


2.4. Holomorphic Chern-Simons theory. Let X be a compact Calabi-Yau manifold of
dimension d where d is odd, Ω X be a holomorphic volume form on X. The space of
fields for the gl N holomorphic Chern-Simons theory on X is given by

                                  A N := Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl N ,

where Ω0,∗ ( X ) is the smooth (0, ∗)-forms on X and [1] is the shifting operator such
that Ω0,1 ( X ) is of degree 0. A N [−1] is a DGLA with differential ∂ and Lie bracket
induced from that of gl N . Moreover, A N is equipped with a (2 − d)-symplectic pairing
                                       Z
                          ω (α, β) =           Tr(αβ) ∧ Ω X ,         α, β ∈ A N .
                                           X
The DGLA structure reflects the gauge transformation, which is also encoded into the
following classical action functional
                                       1
                      HCS N ( A) =                    CS
                                         ω (∂A, A) + IN  ( A ),             A ∈ AN
                                       2
where
                                           1
                                                     Z
                                 CS
                                IN       Tr( A3 ) ∧ Ω X .
                                    ( A) =
                                     3 X
The cohomological degree of the holomorphic Chern-Simons functional is

                                       deg HCS N = 3 − d.

2.4.1 Definition-Lemma. The collections { HCS N } and { IN     CS } are admissible, i.e., belong-

ing to Oadm (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl∞ ). We will denote the corresponding admissible functionals by
HCS∞ and I∞  CS .



                                                 CS ∈ Cyc ( Ω0,∗ ( X )[1])∨ corre-
  Under the isomorphism in Lemma 2.1.2, we have I∞       3
sponding to the cyclically invariant map
                                                 Z
                                                                                         ∗
               A1 ⊗ A2 ⊗ A3 → (−1)| A2 |                 ( A1 A2 A3 ) ∧ Ω X ,   Ai ∈ Ω0,
                                                                                      X [1].
                                                     X

where | A| = i − 1, A ∈ Ω0,i [1], denotes the cohomology degree.

2.4.2 Definition. Let
                                              d >0 (A N∨ )
                                   O (A N ) = Sym
denote the space of functionals on A N modulo constants. Oloc (A N ) will denote the subspace
of O (A N ) given by local functionals. Oadm (A∞ ) will denote the admissible collections. A
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                 29


collection { f N ∈ O (A N )} is called local if each f N ∈ Oloc (A N ). The space of admissible local
functionals will be denoted by Oadm,loc (A∞ ).
                     CS ∈ O
Example 2.3. HCS∞ , I∞      adm,loc (A∞ ).


  The (2 − d)-symplectic structure ω defines a Poisson bracket of degree d − 2 on local
functionals:
                        {−, −}O : Oloc (A N ) ⊗ Oloc (A N ) → Oloc (A N )
where the superscript O refers to open string.

2.4.3 Lemma. The Poisson bracket extends to admissible local functionals

                  {−, −}O : Oadm,loc (A∞ ) ⊗ Oadm,loc (A∞ ) → Oadm,loc (A∞ ).

Proof. By Lemma 2.1.2, the combinatorial part on gl N of every admissible functionals
consists of traces only. The Poisson bracket has kernel given by
                                                N
                                           δ0 ∑ eij ⊗ e ji
                                               i,j=1

where δ0 is the delta function distribution representing the identity operator on Ω0,∗ ( X ),
and eij is the fundamental matrix with only nonzero entry 1 at the ith row and jth col-
umn. It follows that for any two collections of admissible functionals { f N }, { f N0 },
                                          0 O                           0
                            iN                       N            N         O
                             M ({ f N , f N } ) = {i M ( f N ), i M ( f N )} .
                 N
Moreover, ∑i,j      =1 eij ⊗ e ji is obviously GL N -invariant. Therefore the collection of func-
tionals { f N , f N0 }O is admissible.                                                         

2.4.4 Lemma. The holomorphic Chern-Simons functional satisfies the following classical mas-
ter equation
                                     { HCS∞ , HCS∞ }O = 0,
or equivalently
                                   CS   1 CS CS O
                                 ∂I∞  + { I∞ , I∞ } = 0.
                                        2
Here the bracket {−, −} is defined by Lemma 2.4.3.

                        CS defines Sym3 (A ) → C in terms of its components by
Proof. The functionals IN                 N
                                                Z
                          A1 ⊗ A2 ⊗ A3 →                Tr( A1 [ A2 , A3 ]) ∧ Ω X .
                                                    X
30                                 KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


                                     CS } represents the Chevalley-Eilenberg differential
It follows that { HCS∞ , −} = ∂ + { I∞
of the DGLA A N , which squares zero implying the Lemma.

                                                                                               

                    CS , −}O defines a differential on O
   Therefore ∂ + { I∞                                    adm,loc (A∞ ), generating the infin-
itesimal gauge transformation in the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism.

   We have a graded vector space Cyc(Ω0,∗ ( X )[1])∨ of collections of cyclically-invariant
linear functions on tensor powers of Ω0,∗ ( X )[1]. We have seen that we can identify
Cyc(Ω0,∗ ( X )[1])∨ with the weight 1 admissible functions on Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl∞ . Let
Cyc∗loc (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1]) refer to the subcomplex which corresponds to weight 1 elements of
Oadm,loc (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl∞ ). Concretely, an element of Cyc∗loc (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1]) is a collection
of cyclically-invariant linear functionals on tensor powers of Ω0,∗ ( X ), where each such
functional can be written as a finite sum of functionals of the form
                                                 Z
                          α1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ α n 7 →           d Vol D1 α1 . . . Dn αn
                                                     X

where each Di is a differential operator from Ω0,∗ ( X ) to C ∞ ( X ).

2.4.5 Lemma. There is an isomorphism of cochain complexes

                   Oadm (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl∞ ) ∼ d >0 Cyc(Ω0,∗ ( X )[1])∨
                                               = Sym
where on the left hand side the complex has the differential ∂ + { ICS , −} and on the right hand
                                          ∨
side the differential on Cyc Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] makes it a shift by one of the cyclic cochain complex
of Ω0,∗ ( X ).

Proof. This follows from the Tsygan-Loday-Quillen theorem [Tsy83, LQ84] and the fact
that the differential ∂ + { IhCS , −} on O (Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl N [1]) is the Chevalley-Eilenberg
differential associated to the dg Lie algebra Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl N .                          

   It follows from this that the differential on Cyc∗loc (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1]) given by ∂ + { IhCS , −}
is a local version of the cyclic cochain differential.


             3. C OUPLING WITH K ODAIRA -S PENCER THEORY OF GRAVITY

3.1. Coupled system. We are interested in compatible quantizations of gl N holomor-
phic Chern-Simons theory on X coupled with Kodaira-Spencer gauge theory (BCOV
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                           31


theory). We will write down an explicit formula for a classical action which couples
the two systems.

  Recall that the field content of BCOV theory is given by complex

                                          (PV( X )[[t]][2], Q)

where
                                       PVi,j ( X ),   PVi,j ( X ) = Ω0,j ( X, ∧i TX )
                               M
                   PV( X ) =
                                 i,j

is the space of smooth polyvector fields on X. PV( X ) is a bi-graded algebra equipped
with two differentials

                ∂ : PVi,j ( X ) → PVi,j+1 ( X ),        ∂ : PVi,j ( X ) → PVi−1,j ( X )

where ∂ is the divergence operator associated with the holomorphic volume form Ω X .
The differential Q is given by
                                              Q = ∂ + t∂,
where t represents the gravitational descendant. Our convention for grading is that
elements of PV( X )[[t]][2] in PVi,j ( X )tk has degree i + j + 2k − 2.

3.1.1 Definition. The space of fields for the gl N holomorphic Chern-Simons theory coupled to
BCOV theory is the complex

                       E N = PV( X )[[t]][2] ⊕ Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl N [1]
                                                                     

with differential Q N = Q ⊕ ∂.


  The coupling between polyvector fields and holomorphic Chern-Simons theory in
the classical theory is encoded by a natural map

                           PV( X )[[t]][2] → Cyc∗loc (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1]).

The full tree-level coupling is encoded in a map like this which is a map of L∞ algebras.
Willwacher-Calaque’s [WC08] cyclic formality theorem provides such a map. For our
purposes, we need only to have a map of cochain complexes, so we only need the
leading term of the L∞ map constructed in [WC08].

   We will describe very explicitly such a cochain map. The formula will involve cer-
tain integrals of differential forms on some auxiliary spaces.
32                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


  Let Cm = {θi , 1 ≤ i ≤ m|0 < θ1 < θ2 < · · · < θm < 1}, which can be viewed as
parametrizing m + 1 points on the circle up to rotation. There exists a cyclic automor-
phism induced by cyclically permuting the points
                                          
                                          θ − θ if 1 ≤ i ≤ m − 1
                               −1            i +1   1
              σ : Cm → Cm , σ (θi ) =
                                          1 − θ1      i=m

We introduce a 1-form on Cm by

               η = (θ2 − θ1 )dθ1 + · · · + (θm − θm−1 )dθm−1 + (1 − θm )dθm

and a 2-form on Cm
                                          ω = −dη.
It is easy to see that under cyclic permutation

                              σ∗ (η ) = η − dθ1 ,     σ∗ (ω ) = ω.


   Let Σm = {0, 1, · · · , m, •} be the set with m + 2 elements, ordered by 0 < 1 < · · · <
m < •. The additional element • refers to the origin of the disk as in [WC08]. Given
a subset Γ = {i1 , · · · , ik } ⊂ Σm indexed with increasing order, we define a differential
form on Cm by
                                                  
                                                  e j = dθ j 1 ≤ j ≤ m
                                                  
                                                  
                   ωΓ = ei1 ∧ · · · ∧ eik , where     ej = 0       j=0            .
                                                    
                                                    
                                                      ej = η       j=•
                                                    

The choice of Γ also defines a map

                     PV( X ) × Ω0,∗ ( X, gl N )⊗m+1 → C
                              µ ⊗ A0 ⊗ · · · ⊗ A m 7 → µ Γ ( A0 , . . . , A m )


where µΓ is defined as follows. Let Γ = {i1 , . . . , ik } ⊂ Σm . We define an operator ∂i,Γ
for i = 0, . . . , m by ∂i,Γ = ∂ if i ∈ Γ and ∂i,Γ = Id if i 6∈ Γ. Then,
                                 R
                                  Tr (∂ A ∧ · · · ∧ ∂ A ) ∧ (µyΩ )
                                           0,Γ 0           m,Γ m         X     if • 6∈ Γ
       µ Γ ( A0 , · · · , A m ) = R X
                                  (Tr ∂0,Γ A0 ∧ · · · ∧ ∂m,Γ Am ) ∧ (∂µyΩ X ) if • ∈ Γ
                                X

If µ ∈ PVr,∗ ( X ), then this expression is non-zero only when r = k.
                                QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                         33


3.1.2 Lemma. Fixing µ ∈ PV( X ), the functional
                                           Z Z
                                   ∑ ±       X   Cm
                                                      ω k ∧ ω Γ ∧ µ Γ ( A0 , A1 , · · · , A m )
                               Γ⊂Σm

is cyclically invariant.

Remark 3.1. Here ± are some signs coming from permuting graded objects, which will
not be used in the current paper. See [WC08] for details.

Proof. Let σ = (0, 1, . . . , m) be the cyclic permutation of the set {0, 1, . . . , m}. We ex-
tend σ to an isomorphism of sets Σm → Σm by declaring that σ sends • to •. Then, σ
acts on the subsets Γ ⊂ Σm . Explicitly, if Γ = {i1 , · · · , ik } doesn’t contain •, then
                                  
                                  {i + 1, · · · , i + 1}          ik < m
                                       1             k
                         σ(Γ) =
                                  (0, i1 + 1, · · · , ik−1 + 1) ik = m

If Γ = {Γ0 , •}, then
                                                     σ(Γ) = {σ(Γ0 ), •}.
The lemma amounts to showing that
                           Z Z                                                   Z Z
                  ∑ ±                    ω k ∧ ω Γ ∧ µ σ −1 ( Γ ) = ± ∑                        ω k ∧ ωΓ ∧ µΓ
              Γ⊂Σm             X    Cm                                    Γ⊂Σm       X    Cm

where we have suppressed the inputs A0 , · · · , Am for simplicity. On the other hand
                          Z Z                                                 Z Z
              ∑ ±          X       Cm
                                        ω k ∧ ω Γ ∧ µ σ −1 ( Γ ) =     ∑ ±       X       Cm
                                                                                              ω k ∧ ωσ (Γ) ∧ µΓ
            Γ⊂Σm                                                       Γ⊂Σm

while it is direct to check that
                                    ωσ (Γ) = σ ∗ ωΓ +          ∑ ±dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{ j} .
                                                              j∈σ(Γ)

The first term gives
                          Z Z                                                    Z Z
               ∑ ±          X      Cm
                                         σ ∗ ( ω k ∧ ωΓ ) ∧ µΓ =        ∑ ±      X       Cm
                                                                                               ω k ∧ ωΓ ∧ µΓ .
             Γ⊂Σm                                                      Γ⊂Σm

Therefore we need to show that
                                                 Z Z
                           ∑ ∑               ±
                                                 X     Cm
                                                            ω k ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{ j} ∧ µΓ = 0.
                          Γ⊂Σm j∈σ (Γ)

In fact,
                      Z Z
    ∑ ∑           ±
                      X     Cm
                                   ω k ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{ j} ∧ µΓ
   Γ⊂Σm j∈σ (Γ)
34                                          KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI

                      Z Z                                                   Z Z
=∑        ∑       ±              ω k ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{ j} ∧ µΓ + ∑ ±                         ω k ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{1} ∧ µΓ
      ∈Γ j∈σ(Γ)
     0/               X     Cm                                      0∈ Γ       X      Cm

while integration by parts on X implies that
        Z Z                                                                Z Z
∑±       X    Cm
                   ω k ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{1} ∧ µΓ = − ∑ ∑ ±
                                                                           X     Cm
                                                                                      ω k ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ) ∧ µΓ+{ j}
0∈ Γ                                                       ∈Γ j/
                                                          0/   ∈Γ
                                                                            Z Z
                                                     =−∑        ∑ ± X C ωk ∧ dθ1 ∧ ωσ(Γ)\{ j} ∧ µΓ .
                                                           ∈Γ j∈σ(Γ)
                                                          0/                           m


                                                                                                                    

3.1.3 Definition. We define the disk coupling with one interior marked point by the local
functional
                                                         Z Z
                          (t µ, A) = ∑
                    1−disk k
                   IN                            ∑ ±                ω k ∧ ωΓ ∧ µΓ ( A, · · · , A).
                                          m ≥0 Γ ⊂ Σ m   X     Cm



  If µ ∈ PVr,∗ ( X ), then the term in IN1−disk
                                                involving the integral over Cm vanishes
                                    1−disk
unless m = r + 2k. It follows that IN      has cohomology degree
                                                   1−disk
                                              deg IN      = 3 − d.
Remark 3.2. Cm equivalently describes the configuration space on the disk with one
interior point and m + 1 boundary points. In [WC08], a coupled interaction with arbi-
trary number of interior and boundary points are described via a similar integration
on the corresponding configuration space. In the current paper, we only need the
               1−disk
leading term IN       . The other disk interactions will be constructed from deformation
theory.

3.2. Classical master equation. Let O (E N ), Oloc (E N ), Oadm (E∞ ) and Oadm,loc (E∞ ) be
defined similarly as in Definition 2.4.2. Recall that there exists a bracket {−, −}O on
Oloc (A N ) which is well-defined on Oadm,loc (A N ). It is easy to see that {−, −}O extends
naturally to Oloc (E N ) and Oadm,loc (E∞ ).
                        1−disk
   The collection { IN         } defines an admissible function, which we will denote by
 1
I∞ − disk . The differential Q N induces a differential on O (E N ) which is well-defined on
Oadm (E∞ ) and we will denote it by Q∞ .

3.2.1 Lemma. The following classical master equation holds
                                           CS  1 CS CS O
                                       Q∞ I∞  + { I∞ , I∞ } = 0
                                               2
                                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                            35


                                                   1−disk      CS 1−disk O
                                               Q∞ I∞      + { I∞ , I∞   } = 0.

Proof. The first equation follows from Lemma 2.4.4, since Q∞ I∞   CS = ∂I CS . The second
                                                                         ∞
equation follows essentially from an easy part of [WC08]. We sketch a proof here for
                                       1−disk = 0. Therefore it amounts to showing that
completeness. It is easy to see that ∂I∞
                          Z Z
        − ∑ ±                           ω k+1 ∧ ωΓ ∧ (∂µ)Γ ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Am )
           Γ⊂Σm               X    Cm
                         Z Z
    =      ∑         ±
                          X        Cm−1
                                            ω k ∧ ωΓ ∧ (µΓ ( A0 A1 , · · · , Am ) − µΓ ( A0 , A1 A2 , · · · , Am )+
        Γ ⊂ Σ m −1

        · · · ± µΓ ( Am A0 , A1 , · · · , Am−1 )).
The right hand side corresponds to the integration on the boundary of Cm
                          Z Z
            ∑         ±
                              X     Cm−1
                                             ω k ∧ ω Γ ∧ ( µ Γ ( A0 A1 , · · · , A m ) − µ Γ ( A0 , A1 A2 , · · · , A m )
         Γ ⊂ Σ m −1

         + · · · ± µΓ ( Am A0 , A1 , · · · , Am−1 ))
                      Z Z
     = ∑ ±                              ω k ∧ ω Γ ∧ µ Γ ( A0 , A1 , · · · , A m )
         Γ⊂Σm             X       ∂Cm
                      Z Z
     = ∑ ±                             d(ω k ∧ ωΓ ∧ µΓ ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Am ))
         Γ⊂Σm             X       Cm
                     Z Z
     =∑±                           d(ω k ∧ η ∧ ωΓ\{•} ∧ (∂µ)Γ\• ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Am ))
         •∈Γ          X       Cm
                          Z Z
     =− ∑ ±                                 ω k+1 ∧ ωΓ ∧ (∂µ)Γ ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Am )
             Γ⊂Σm             X        Cm

as desired. Here we have used the fact that d(ω k ∧ ωΓ ∧ µΓ ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Am )) = 0 if Γ
doesn’t contain •.                                                                          

Remark 3.3. The classical master equation says that I∞    1−disk describes a first-order de-

formation of the holomorphic Chern-Simons functional HCS∞ . As explained in the
introduction, it gives in fact the universal first-order deformation.


3.3. An alternative approach to constructing the interaction I 1−disk . We have pre-
sented the explicit formula for the interaction I 1−disk which arises from a cochain map
between PV( X )[[t]] and cyclic cochains of Ω0,∗ ( X ). One can, however, use a simple
abstract argument to prove the existence of the desired I 1−disk . In this section we will
sketch this argument to give a conceptual understanding of I 1−disk .
36                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   By the Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg theorem [Kon03] there is an isomorphism
                                                           ∗ ( Ω0,∗ ( X )). This local
between PV( X ) and the local Hochschild cochain complex HCloc
Hochschild cochain complex is built from Hochschild cochains which are sequences
of maps
                                    Ω0,∗ ( X )⊗n → Ω0,∗ ( X )

which are poly-differential operators. The integration map on X allows us to identify
local Hochschild cochains of X with a local version of the linear dual of the Hochschild
chains on X. The latter consists of collections of functionals

                                      Ω0,∗ ( X )⊗n+1 → C

which are local in the sense used before, and equipped with a differential which is
dual to the Hochschild chain differential. In this way, the Connes B-operator can be
                             ∗ ( Ω0,∗ ( X )).
viewed as an operator on HCloc

     A simple check shows us that the HKR map

                                              ∗
                                  PV( X ) → HCloc (Ω0,∗ ( X ))

intertwines the operator ∂ with the Connes B-operator. It follows that we get a HKR
map
                                              ∗
                             PV( X )[[t]] → HCloc (Ω0,∗ ( X ))[[t]]

which intertwines the differential ∂ + t∂ with the differential d + tB, where d is the
Hochschild differential and B is the Connes operator.

   The final step is to use the fact that there is a quasi-isomorphism HCloc∗ ( Ω0,∗ ( X ))[[ t ]]

and the local cyclic cochain complex of Ω0,∗ ( X ). This last fact is a local version of the
standard theorem comparing two different models for cyclic cohomology: one based
on a double complex, and one based on collections of cyclically-invariant multi-linear
maps.



                       4. Q UANTUM OPEN - CLOSED BCOV THEORY

 In this section, X will be a compact Calabi-Yau of dimension d odd. We will define
what it means to construct the quantum open-closed BCOV theory on X.
                             QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                                37


4.1. Regularization. Let us fix a Kähler metric on X, which gives rise to the adjoint
 ∗
∂ on both PV( X ) and Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl N [1]. Associated to the corresponding Laplacian
   ∗   ∗
∂∂ + ∂ ∂, we have the heat kernels
                                                 K CL ∈ PV( X ) ⊗ PV( X )
                                      KO,N
                                       L   ∈ (Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl N )⊗2
where L is the time parameter for the heat kernel. The superscript C refers to “closed
string” sector while O refers to “open string” sector. They can be viewed as the regu-
larization of the delta-function distribution which represents the ultraviolet singular-
ity in general QFT. We will treat both as elements in Sym2 (E N ). In terms of compo-
nents, we have
K CL ∈         PVi,j ( X ) ⊗ PVd−i,d− j ( X ),        KO,N                (Ω0,i ( X ) ⊗ gl N ) ⊗ (Ω0,d−i ( X ) ⊗ gl N ).
         M                                                       M
                                                       L   ∈
         i,j                                                      i

Then with respect to the cohomology degree on E N , we have
                              deg(K CL ) = 2d − 4,              deg(KO,N
                                                                     L ) = d − 2.

4.1.1 Definition. We define the effective propagators at scale L by the smooth kernels
                                                        Z L
                                                                      ∗
                                       P(e, L) =  C
                                                                (∂∂ ⊗ 1)KtC dt
                                                            e
                                                         Z L
                                                                  ∗
                                     P(e, L)O,N =               (∂ ⊗ 1)KtO,N .
                                                            e


  Note that
                          deg P(e, L)C = 2d − 6,                deg P(e, L)O,N = d − 3.

   In general, every symmetric element Φ of Symk (V ) defines an order k differen-
tial operator ∂Φ on O (V ). This is the unique order k operator whose restriction to
Symk (V ∨ ) is given by pairing with Φ. This is generalized to the setting for smooth
kernels and functions being distributions. In particular, the effective propagator in-
duces order two operators
                                  ∂ P(e,L)C , ∂ P(e,L)O,N : O (E N ) → O (E N )
of cohomology degree 2d − 6, d − 3 respectively.

4.1.2 Definition. We define the effective BV operators at scale L
                                     ∆CL = ∂(∂⊗1)KC ,            ∆O,N
                                                                  L   = ∂KO,N
                                                        L                         L
38                                      KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


on O (E N ) of cohomology degree 2d − 5, d − 2 respectively. The corresponding effective BV
operators are defined by

                    {Φ, Ψ}CL = ∆CL (ΦΨ) − ∆CL (Φ)Ψ − (−1)|Φ| Φ∆CL (Ψ)
                                                             |Φ|
                  {Φ, Ψ}C,N
                        L   = ∆C,N         C,N
                               L ( ΦΨ ) − ∆ L ( Φ ) Ψ − (−1)     Φ∆C,N
                                                                   L ( Ψ ).

4.1.3 Definition. A collection of functionals { f N | f N ∈ O (E N )} is called admissible with N-
degree m if { f N /N m } is an admissible collection. The space of such collections will be denoted
     (m)
by Oadm (E∞ ).

  A collection of such functionals is called weakly admissible if it is finite sum of functionals
which are admissible of some N-degree. We let
                                        (∗)                     (m)
                                       Oadm (E∞ ) =            Oadm (E∞ )
                                                        M

                                                        m ≥0

denote the collection of weakly admissible functions.


  Obviously our previous definition for Oadm (E∞ ) refers to admissible functions of
N-degree 0. There exists a natural identification

                                         Oadm (E∞ ) ∼
                                                       (m)
                                                    = Oadm (E∞ )
which sends { f N } to { N m f N } and morphisms
                                 (m)             (l )                 (m+l )
                               Oadm (E∞ ) ⊗ Oadm (E∞ ) → Oadm (E∞ ).

In this way the space of weakly admissible functions forms an algebra. There is an
algebra isomorphism
                                 (∗) ∼
                               O     = Oadm (E∞ )[ N ].
                                           adm
In fact this is an isomorphism of C[ N ]-algebras, where C[ N ] acts on a weakly admissi-
ble collection of functions { f N } by multiplying each f N by a polynomial P( N ) ∈ C[ N ].

4.1.4 Definition-Lemma. Suppose that { f N }, { g N } are weakly admissible collections of func-
tions. Then so are {∂ P(e,L)C f N }, {∆CL f N }, {∂ P(e,L)O,N f N }, {∆O,N
                                                                       L   f N }, {{ f N , g N }CL }, {{ f N , g N }O,N
                                                                                                                    L }.
                                                          (∗)
We will denote the corresponding operators on Oadm (E∞ ) by

                        ∂ P(e,L)C , ∆CL , ∂ P(e,L)O,∞ , ∆O,∞       C          O,∞
                                                         L , {−, −} L , {−, −} L .


   The operators ∂ P(e,L)O,∞ , ∆O,∞           O,∞
                                   L , {−, −} L   may increase the N-degree by 1 by “closing
a trace”, while ∂ P(e,L)C , ∆ L , {−, −} L preserve the N-degree.
                             C          C
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                               39


4.2. The renormalization group flow and the quantum master equation. Now we
introduce a formal parameter λ of cohomology degree 3 − d and consider
                               (∗)
                             Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]] = Oadm (E∞ )[ N ][[λ]]
.

4.2.1 Definition. Let
                                (∗)                        (∗)
                              Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+ ⊂ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]
be the space of functionals of the form
                                      I=      ∑      λ2g+h+ f Ig,h; f
                                           g≥0,h≥0

such that Ig,h; f has N-degree f and weight h (see Definition 2.1.3) and such that I0,0;0 , I0,1;0
are at least cubic.

                                              (∗)
  Under the isomorphism between Oadm (E∞ ) and Oadm (E∞ )[ N ], a series I = ∑ λ2g+h+ f Ig,h; f
becomes a series of the form ∑ λ2g+h+ f Ig,h; f N f .

    Given I as in the definition, we can Taylor expand each Ig,h; f as a sum
                                           Ig,h; f = ∑ Ig,h,n; f
where Ig,h,n; f is homogeneous of degree n as a function of the closed fields.

   Heuristically, we should think of Ig,h,n; f as corresponding to a surface of genus g
with n interior marked points, h boundary components with at least one marked point,
and f unmarked boundary components, where we have inputs from PV( X )[[z]][2] on
interior marked points and inputs from Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl N [1] on boundary marked points.

4.2.2 Definition-Lemma. We have a well-defined renormalization group (RG) flow op-
erator
                            (∗)                 (∗)
                     WeL : Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+ → Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+
defined by                                                       
                WeL ( I ) = λ2 log exp λ2 ∂ P(e,L)C + λ∂ P(e,L)O,∞ exp I/λ2 .
                                                                           


Proof. WeL ( I ) is given by sums over connected Feynman graphs with two types of
propagator P(e, L)C (closed string), P(e, L)O,∞ (open string) and vertices I of two types
of half edges from closed string and open string sector. We think about each term
Ig,h; f as a surface Σ g,h; f of genus g, with h + f boundaries, then each vertex contribute
40                                 KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


a factor λ−χ(Σg,h; f ) where χ(Σ g,h; f ) is the Euler characteristic. It is easy to see that a
connected Feynman graph will produce a new surface Σ g0 ,h0 ; f 0 of similar type such the
Feynman graph integral produces a factor λ−χ(Σg0 ,h0 ; f 0 ) . WeL ( I ) being well-defined now
follows from the fact that χ(Σ g0 ,h0 ; f 0 ) ≤ 2 and that only finite graphs contribute given
a fixed number of field inputs.                                                               

Remark: Suppose we apply this RG flow operator WeL ( I ) to, for example, the holomor-
                               CS . The result can be described as a sum over trivalent
phic Chern-Simons interaction I∞
ribbon graphs with external lines, where each vertex of the ribbon graph has the in-
           CS and each edge has the open-string propagator P ( e, L )O,∞ . Each ribbon
teraction I∞
graph γ is weighted by λ1−χ(γ) and by N to the number of faces of the ribbon graph
which have no external lines.

4.2.3 Definition. As before, let E N denote the space of fields at finite N. Let O (E N )[[λ]]+
denote the series of the form I = ∑ Ir,nO ,nC λr where Ir,nO ,nC is homogeneous of degree nO
(respectively, nC ) as a function of the open-string fields (respectively, closed-string fields).
We require that I0,nO ,nC = 0 unless nO = 0 and nC ≥ 3, and that I1,nO ,nC = 0 unless
nO + 2nC ≥ 3.

     Then, the formula
                                                                  
                 WeL ( I ) = λ2 log exp λ2 ∂ P(e,L)C + λ∂ P(e,L)O,N exp I/λ2 .
                                                                            


gives a well-defined renormalization group flow operator on O (E N )[[λ]]+ .


  If I ∈ O (∗) (E∞ ), let { I N ∈ O (E N )} denote the collection of functions making up the
weakly admissible function I.

4.2.4 Lemma. The map

                             O (∗) (E∞ )[[λ]]+ → O (E N )[[λ]]+

                             ∑ λ2g+h+ f Ig,h; f 7→ ∑ λ2g+h+ f Ig,h;
                                                               N
                                                                    f

intertwines the renormalization group flow maps.


Proof. By definition, the operators ∂ P(e,L)C and ∂ P(e,L)O,∞ act on a weakly admissible
collection { I N } via the action of ∂ P(e,L)C and ∂ P(e,L)O,N on each I N . Further the map
O (∗) (E∞ ) → O (E N ) is an algebra homomorphism. The result follows immediately. 
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                           41


                         (∗)
4.2.5 Definition. I ∈ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+ is said to satisfy quantum master equation (QME)
at scale L if
                                             1             1         O,∞
                Q∞ I + λ2 ∆CL I + λ∆O,∞               C
                                     L I + 2 { I, I } L + 2λ { I, I } L  = 0.


  It is also convenient to write the quantum master equation formally as
                                               
                                                  I/λ2
                              Q∞ + λ2 ∆CL + λ∆O
                                              L e      = 0.

4.2.6 Definition-Lemma. A function I ∈ O (E N )[[λ]] satisfies the finite-N scale L quantum
master equation if
                                          1              1
                 Q∞ I + λ2 ∆CL I + λ∆O,N
                                     L   + { I, I }CL +    { I, I }O,N
                                                                   L   = 0.
                                          2             2λ

  The restriction map
                               O (∗) (E∞ )[[λ]]+ → O (E N )[[λ]]+
takes a solution to the scale L quantum master equation to a solution to the scale L finite-N
quantum master equation.

  Further, a functional I ∈ O (∗) (E∞ )[[λ]]+ satisfies the scale L quantum master equation if
and only if all of its finite N restrictions I N satisfy the scale L quantum master equation.


Proof. The fact that the restriction map is compatible with the QME is immediate from
the fact that we defined the scale L BV Laplacians and odd Poisson brackets at infinite
N in terms of their finite N counterparts. The fact an infinity N functional I satisfies
the QME if and only if each of its finite N restrictions I N does follows from the fact
that the product of all the restriction maps

                                   O (∗) (E∞ ) → ∏ O (E N )
                                                  N

is injective.                                                                               

4.2.7 Lemma. RG flow and QME are compatible in the following sense: if I satisfies QME at
scale e, then WeL ( I ) satisfies QME at scale L.


Proof. This is proved similarly as in [Cos11]. The results of [Cos11] are directly appli-
cable to the finite-N version of this statement. The fact that the RG flow and QME are
                                                (∗)
compatible with the restriction maps from Oadm (E∞ ) → O (E N ), and the fact that to
42                                     KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


                                                                                   (∗)
verify the quantum master equation for a functional I ∈ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+ it suffices to
verify it for all of its restrictions I N , implies the result for infinite N.       

4.3. The definition of quantum theory. We now have enough notations to define the
notion of quantum open-closed BCOV theory.

4.3.1 Definition. A quantum open-closed BCOV theory on a Calabi-Yau X of odd dimension
d is a collection of functionals
                                           (∗)
                                 I [ L] ∈ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+
one for each L > 0, satisfying the following axioms.

     (1) The renormalization group flow:
                                    I [ L] = WeL ( I [e]),         ∀ L, e > 0.
     (2) The quantum master equation
                                                  1                          1                    O,∞
        Q∞ I [ L] + λ2 ∆CL I [ L] + λ∆O,∞                              C
                                      L I [ L ] + 2 { I [ L ], I [ L ]} L + 2λ { I [ L ], I [ L ]} L  = 0.

     (3) The locality axiom: I [ L] has a small L asymptotic expansion in terms of admissible
         local functionals,
                                          I [ L] ≃ ∑ Φi ( L) Ji
         where Φi ( L) are some functions of L, and Ji ∈ Oadm,loc (E∞ )[[λ, N ]].
     (4) The degree axiom. With respect to the expansion
                                I [ L] =      ∑          Ig,h,n; f [ L]λ2g+h+ f N f ,
                                           g,h,n, f ≥0

         where Ig,h,n; f ∈ Symn (PV( X )[[t]][2])∨ ⊗ Symh (Cyc(Ω0,∗ ( X )[1])), Ig,h,n; f has co-
         homology degree (d − 3)(2g − 2 + h + f ). Equivalently deg(λ−2 I [ L]) = 0.
     (5) The classical limit. We require that
                                                CS                          1−disk
                             lim I0,1,0 [ L] = I∞  ,          lim I0,1,1 = I∞      .
                             L →0                             L →0

4.3.2 Definition. A quantum theory coupling the gl N holomorphic Chern-Simons theory
with BCOV theory is specified by a collection of functionals I N [ L] ∈ O (E N )[[λ]]+ satisfy-
ing the same properties as listed above, except that the classical limit axiom is changed to the
following:

     (1) If we expand I N [ L] = ∑r≥0 IrN [ L]λr , then I0N [ L] is a functional only of the closed-
         string fields and is at least cubic.
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                               43


    (2) The limit
                                             lim I1 [ L]
                                             L →0

                                CS + I 1−disk when the homogenous degree of closed inputs ≤ 1.
        exists and is equal to IN     N

4.3.3 Lemma. If I [ L] ∈ O (∗) (E∞ )[[λ]]+ is a collection of functionals defining a quantum
open-closed BCOV theory, then the restrictions I [ L] N ∈ O (E N )[[λ]]+ define a quantum the-
ory coupling gl N holomorphic Chern-Simons with BCOV theory.

    Conversely, suppose one has a collection I [ L] N ∈ O (E N )[[λ]]+ of functionals defining
a coupled BCOV theory and gl N holomorphic Chern-Simons. Suppose that the collection
{ I [ L] N } defines a weakly admissible collection of functionals. Let us expand

                                     I [ L] N = ∑ Ir,h;
                                                   N
                                                        f [ L]λ
                                                                r
                                                r ≥0

where the collections of admissible functionals Ir,h; f [ L] N are of N-degree f and weight h. Sup-
pose further that Ir,h; f [ L] N = 0 unless r − h − f ≥ 0 and is even. Then, the admissible
collection I [ L] N defines a quantum open-closed BCOV theory.


Proof. The statement that the restriction to finite N of a quantum open-closed BCOV
theory gives a quantization of the coupled gl N holomorphic Chern-Simons and BCOV
theory is immediate. For the converse, suppose we have functionals I [ L] N as stated
                                                                            (∗)
in the lemma. Then, they define an admissible function I [ L] ∈ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]. The
RG flow, quantum master equation, classical limit axiom, and locality axiom are au-
tomatically satisfied, as they can be tested at finite N. Then only thing that needs to
be verified is that I [ L] has an expansion of the form ∑ Ig,h; f [ L]λ2g+h+ f where Ig,h; f is of
weight h and m-degree f . This, however, follows from the final criterion stated in the
lemma.                                                                                          


   Thus, we see that constructing the open-closed theory is essentially the same as
constructing the coupling of the closed string sector to the gl N gauge theory for all N,
in a compatible way.

  For our purpose, we will also need a version of quantum open-closed theory with-
out free boundaries. This can be obtained via a mod-N reduction from the above
definition.
44                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


4.3.4 Definition. A quantum open-closed BCOV theory on a Calabi-Yau X of odd dimension
d without free boundaries is a collection of functionals I [ L] ∈ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+ for each L > 0,
satisfying all conditions (1)(2)(3)(4)(5) as above modulo N, i.e., we disregard all components
whose N-degree > 0.


   We leave it to the reader to check that this mod-N version is well-defined. This
definition amounts to ignoring all the terms containing free boundaries without open
string inputs that appears in the renormalization group flow and quantum master
equation. We will see shortly that a quantum open-closed BCOV theory modulo N is
the same data as a quantization of the open-closed theory where on the open sector
we use the super Lie algebras gl( N | N ) instead of gl( N ).



4.4. Supergroup holomorphic Chern-Simons. Everything we have discussed works
if we consider holomorphic Chern-Simons with gauge Lie algebra gl( N | N ). The
space of fields is Ω0,∗ ( X )[1] ⊗ gl( N | N ). We let E N | N denote the corresponding space
of fields for the open-closed theory

                     E N | N = PV( X )[[t]][2] ⊕ Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl( N | N )[1].

The formulae we wrote for the Chern-Simons action and the one-disk interaction
 1−disk
IN      apply in this situation too, except that as well as taking the trace in gl N we
take the trace in the defining representation of gl( N | N ).

  Admissible functions Oadm (E∞|∞ ) on E N | N are defined similarly, from which we can
define the RG flow and quantum master equation for open-closed BCOV theory in the
supergroup case. Before we do so, we need a small detour about differential operators
on the space O (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)).

   Let W be any graded vector space. As before, let Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)) and Oadm (W ⊗
gl(∞ | ∞)) denote sequences of admissible functions on W ⊗ gl( N ) and on W ⊗ gl( N |
N ) respectively. There is a natural isomorphism of algebras

                        Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)) ∼
                                         = Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞))

since both can be identified with the symmetric algebra on the dual of Cyc(W ).
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                            45


         (∗)
  Let Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)) denote the space of weakly admissible sequences of functions
on W ⊗ gl( N ). There is an isomorphism

                         Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)) ∼
                          (∗)
                                          = Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞))[ N ]

and so a map
                            (∗)
                          Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)) → O (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞))
obtained by setting N = 0.

   For example, in the case that W = C, the algebra of admissible functions is gener-
ated by the functions A 7→ Tr An on gl( N ) or on gl( N | N ), for n > 0. The algebra of
weakly admissible functions includes the case n = 0; the function Tr Id takes value N
on gl( N ) and zero on gl( N | N ). In this case, the map from weakly admissible func-
tions on gl( N ) to admissible functions on gl( N | N ) sends the function A 7→ Tr An on
gl( N ) to the same function on gl( N | N ).

4.4.1 Lemma. Let W be a graded vector space and let P ∈ W ⊗ W be a symmetric element.
                   N|M
Define operators δP⊗c on O (W ⊗ gl( N | M)) associated to the elements P ⊗ c ∈ W ⊗2 ⊗
gl( N | M)⊗2 where c ∈ gl( N | M )⊗2 is the Casimir. (The Casimir is the inverse to the
invariant pairing on gl( N | M) coming from Tr( XY ) in the defining representation). In the
case that M = 0 we will refer to this operator as δPN⊗c .

  Then, δPN⊗c preserves the class of weakly admissible functions on W ⊗ gl( N ), and so gives an
                   (∗)                          N|N
operator δP∞⊗c on Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)). Further, δP⊗c preserves the class of admissible functions
                                               ∞|∞
on W ⊗ gl( N | N ), and so gives an operator δP⊗c on Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)).

  The natural map
                          ∗
                         Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞)) → Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞))
                                     ∞|∞
intertwines the operators δP∞⊗c and δP⊗c .

                                                                     ∞|∞
Proof. This is a simple combinatorial check. The upshot that δP⊗c being well-defined
on Oadm (W ⊗ gl(∞ | ∞)) as opposed to the gl( N )-case follows from the fact that any
increase of N-degree comes with a factor Tr(1) which is zero for gl( N | N ).       


  Let Oadm (E∞|∞ )[[λ]] denote the space of sequences of admissible functions on the
spaces E N | N with a formal parameter λ. As before, we can define the open-closed
46                                             KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


BV operators and RG flow operators on each space O (E N | N )[[λ]]. There is something
special, however, that happens in the supergroup case.

4.4.2 Definition-Lemma. Suppose that { f N }, { g N } are admissible sequences of functions in
                                                                                  O,N | N
O (E N | N ). Then so are {∂ P(e,L)C f N }, {∆CL f N }, {∂ P(e,L)O,N | N f N }, {∆ L      f N }, {{ f N , g N }CL },
              O,N | N
{{ f N , g N } L        }.
                                                                     (∗)
     We will denote the corresponding operators on Oadm (E∞|∞ ) by
                                                            O,∞|∞                      O,∞|∞
                         ∂ P(e,L)C , ∆CL , ∂ P(e,L)O,∞|∞ , ∆ L      , {−, −}CL , {−, −} L      .

   The key difference with the gl( N ) case is that, in the gl( N ) case, the open-string
BV operator and RG flow operator can increase the N-degree. (Recall that a sequence
of functionals { f N } is weakly admissible with N-degree k if the sequence N −k f N is
admissible). In the gl( N | N ) case, these operators preserve the functionals of N-
degree zero, and so the class of admissible as opposed to weakly admissible sequences.

Proof. It is clear that the operators coming from the closed-string sector preserve the
class of admissible sequences of functionals. We need to check the statement for the
                                                                               O,N | N
operators coming from the open-string sector. Since the BV bracket {−, −} L            is
                                                     O,N | N
determined by the BV Laplacian 4 L                             , it suffices to check the desired property for
               O,N | N
the operators 4 L      and ∂ P(e,L)O,N | N .

     Both cases follow from lemma 4.4.1.                                                                         

     Let Oadm (E∞|∞ )[[λ]]+ denote the subspace of Oadm ( E∞|∞ )[[λ]] consisting of series
                                                  I = ∑ Ig,h λ2g−2+h
where Ig,h has weight h (see Definition 2.1.3) and I0,0 and I0,1 are at least cubic.

4.4.3 Definition. A quantum open-closed BCOV theory for the supergroups gl( N | N ) is a
collection of functionals I [ L] ∈ Oadm (E∞|∞ ) satisfying the axioms listed in definition 4.3.1.


     The main result of this section is the following.

4.4.4 Proposition. A quantum open-closed BCOV theory for the supergroups gl( N | N ) is
the same thing as a quantum open-closed BCOV theory for the ordinary groups gl( N ) where
we work modulo N as in definition 4.3.4.
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                           47


Proof. As we have seen, there is an isomorphism between the space Oadm (E∞|∞ ) of se-
quences of admissible functions on E N | N and the space Oadm (E∞ ) of sequences of ad-
missible functions on E N . This implies that a functional I [ L] ∈ Oadm (E∞ )[[λ]]+ defin-
ing a modulo N quantum theory can be viewed as a functional in Oadm (E∞|∞ )[[λ]]+
defining a supergroup theory. It remains to check that this isomorphism respects all
the axioms. The compatibility of the RG flow axiom and the quantum master equation
axiom with this isomorphism follows from lemma 4.4.1.                                    




                   5. E XISTENCE AND UNIQUENESS -L OCAL THEORY

  One of the main properties of quantum field theory is locality. This allows us to
build up the whole quantum theory from local data on the underlying manifold. Our
main result in this first paper of this series is to prove that there exists a unique quanti-
zation on the local piece of a Calabi-Yau manifold, i.e., on Cn , satisfying obvious local
symmetries. Since the local theory illustrates the main structures of open-closed BCOV
theory, we will describe the construction in detail. The main tool of the construction is
the obstruction theory for perturbative quantization developed in [Cos11].

   We will construct the theory modulo N, in the sense explained in definition 4.3.4.
Equivalently, this means that for the open string sector we use the supergroups gl( N |
N ) instead of gl( N ). In the language of Riemann surfaces, it means that we will con-
struct the theory without free boundaries.

  The main theorems we will prove in the rest of the paper are the following.

Theorem A. Let X be a Calabi-Yau manifold with an action of C× which rescales the volume
form (we call such an X conical). Suppose we have constructed a quantum BCOV theory
which only includes I0,h,n; f when n + h + f ≤ 2. In other words, we ask that we have only
disk amplitudes with at most one closed-string marked point, and annulus amplitudes with
no closed-string marked points, satisfying all our axioms modulo higher-order terms. The disk
amplitudes are specified by the classical limit of our theory.

  Then, there exists a unique quantization of the open-closed BCOV theory on X in a way
compatible with the given C× action.
48                               KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   What this theorem shows is that, once we can specify certain disk and annulus
amplitudes, the rest of the theory at all genera can be constructed uniquely. The quan-
tization problem is controlled, using results from [Cos11], by a certain obstruction-
deformation cohomology group. The main point is that there is a cancellation be-
tween the obstruction/deformation group for the open theory and the closed theory
that appears once we go beyond the annulus level.

  This cohomology calculation does not apply at the annulus level. It turns out that
there is a cohomology class giving a potential obstruction (or anomaly) to constructing
the theory at the annulus level.

Theorem B. On Cd when we work modulo N (that is, use the supergroups gl( N | N ) as our
gauge groups) then there is a unique quantization at the annulus level. That is, the annulus
anomaly vanishes (so the quantization exists) and there is no ambiguity in quantizing to the
annulus level.

   Theorem B will be proved by explicitly computing the annulus obstruction, which
again vanishes by a marvelous cancellation between open string and closed string sec-
tors. This completes the local theory of quantum open-closed BCOV theory, which
says that the whole package is completely determined via deformation theory by
the open string sector (HCS∞ ) and its first-order coupling with closed string sector
  1−disk ).
(I∞




                               6. O BSTRUCTION THEORY

   Let X be a conical Calabi-Yau. Thus, X has an action of C× which scales the volume
form with weight w 6= 0. Let us choose a Kähler metric on X which is invariant under
the S1 inside this C× . In this section we will prove theorem A.

   The S1 action on X induces an action on the space of fields of BCOV theory, by
naturality. It therefore induces an action on all spaces of functionals on the space of
fields. We will denote this action by ρ. We view S1 as a subset of C× with coordinate
µ where |µ| = 1. We will extend this S1 -action to the λ variable by


                                        ρµ λ = µw λ
                          QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                             49


The fact that we have chosen an S1 -invariant Kähler metric on X implies that

                            ρµ (K CL ) = µ−2w K CL ,     ρµ (KO
                                                              L) = µ
                                                                     −w O
                                                                       KL ,
             ∗
while ∂, ∂, ∂ all commute with ρµ . The follow lemma is then an easy consequence.

6.0.5 Lemma. The quantum master equation and RG flow equation is compatible with S1 -
action in the sense that
             h                      i     h 2                              i
                                               λ ∂ P(e,L)C +λ∂ P(e,L)O,∞
                Q∞ + λ ∆ L + λ∆ L , ρµ = 0,
                         2 C   O
                                             e                           , ρµ = 0.

6.0.6 Definition. A quantum open-closed BCOV theory I [ L] = ∑ g,h, f Ig,h; f [ L]λ2g+h ∈
  (∗)
Oadm [[λ]]+ is S1 -invariant if Ig,h; f is of weight −(2g − 2 + h + f )w under the S1 -action

                              ρµ ( Ig,h; f [ L]) = µ−(2g−2+h+ f )w Ig,h; f [ L],

or equivalently I [ L]/λ2 is S1 -invariant. Similarly, if we work with an S1 -invariant quantum
open-closed BCOV theory modulo N for I [ L] = ∑ g,h Ig,h [ L]λ2g+h ∈ Oadm [[λ]]+ , we require
that
                                  ρµ ( Ig,h [ L]) = µ−(2g−2+h)w Ig,h [ L].


   By Lemma 6.0.5, the definition of S1 -invariant quantum open-closed BCOV theory
is compatible with quantum master equation and RG flow equation. We will analyze
the obstruction problem of constructing S1 -equivariant open-closed quantum BCOV
theory on X.

6.0.7 Definition. Let T ( X ) (or just T ) be the simplicial set of S1 -invariant quantum open-
closed BCOV theories on X, defined modulo N. The zero-simplices of this simplicial set are
quantizations in the sense discussed above. The n-simplices are families of quantizations over
forms on the n-simplex, in the sense explained in [Cos11].


  We will use an inductive argument to analyze possible quantizations.

6.0.8 Definition. We define an ordering on N × N by

                   ( g1 , R 1 ) < ( g2 , R 2 ) ,   if g1 < g2 , or g1 = g2 , R1 < R2 .

6.0.9 Definition. We define T ≤(G,R) ( X ) to be the simplicial set of S1 -invariant quantum
open-closed theories where the functionals Ig,h,n [ L] are defined for ( g, h + n) ≤ ( G, R). Let
T <(G,R) ( X ) denote the simplicial set where the functionals are defined for ( g, h + n) <
( G, R). (Recall that n is the number of closed-string inputs and Ig,h [ L] = ∑n Ig,h,n [ L]).
50                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   This definition makes sense, since the RG flow equation and quantum master equa-
tion for the functionals Ig,h,n [ L] where ( g, h + n) ≤ ( G, R) do not depend on the func-
tionals Ig,h,n [ L] where ( g, h + n) 6≤ ( G, R).

  The results of [Cos11] imply that the simplicial sets T ≤(G,R) ( X ) are Kan complexes
and the maps T ≤(G,R) ( X ) → T <(G,R) ( X ) are Kan fibrations.

     The main theorem of this section is the following.

6.0.10 Theorem. For ( g, R) with g > 0 or g = 0, R ≥ 3, the map

                                T ≤( g,R) ( X ) → T <( g,R−1) ( X )

is a weak equivalence.

6.0.11 Corollary. The map T ( X ) → T ≤(0,2) is a weak equivalence.

   The corollary is immediate: T ( X ) is a limit of an infinite sequence of fibrations each
of which is a weak equivalence.

     The proof of this theorem will take up the rest of this section.

  The first thing we need to know is a result from [Cos11], which describes the obstruction-
deformation complex for lifting from T <(G,R) to T (G,R) in terms of a complex of local
functionals.

   Since X is non-compact, it is useful to take our fields to have compact support. Let
Ec,N denote the space of fields with compact support, where on the open sector we
use the gauge group gl( N ). Let Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ ) denote the space of admissible local
functionals.

  It is useful to shift the cohomological degree and the S1 action on this space of
admissible local functionals.

6.0.12 Definition. Let Oadm,loc
                            0     (Ec,∞ ) denote the space of admissible local functionals but with
a cohomological shift, whereby the functionals of weight h are shifted by [h(d − 3)]. The graded
vector space Oadm,loc
                 0    (Ec,∞ ) acquires a differential given by combining the linear differential on
the space of fields with bracketing with our classical action functionals I0,1,0 and I0,1,1 .

    The space of admissible local functionals has an S1 action coming from that on the space of
fields by Lie derivative. Let us give a slightly different S1 action on Oadm,loc
                                                                         0       (Ec,∞ ) by saying
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                51


that S1 acts on the open-string fields in the usual way, by Lie derivative, but that S1 acts on the
closed-string fields PV( X )[[t]] via the Lie derivative on forms on X, using the isomorphism
PV( X ) ∼
        = Ω∗,∗ ( X ) coming from the holomorphic volume form on X. This shifts the weight of
the S1 action on PV( X ) by w.


  Let
                                               0
                                       Vh,n ⊂ Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ )
be the subcomplex of those local functionals I which are homogeneous of weight n
as a functional on PVc ( X )[[t]][2] and admissible of of weight h as a functional on
    ∗
Ω0,
  c ( X )[1] ⊗ gl N . Let
                                                  M
                                         VR =            Vh,n .
                                                h+n= R

VR is a subcomplex of Oadm,loc
                       0       (Ec,∞ ). The differential, explicitly, is
                                                                                  1−disk
               Q∞ + { I0,1,0 , −}O + { I0,1,1 , −}C ,              CS
                                                         I0,1,0 = I∞  , I0,1,1 = I∞      .

This differential commutes with the S1 action on VR (where we use the modified S1
                                                                 (k)
action as discussed in the definition of Oadm,loc
                                          0       (Ec,∞ )). Let VR denote the subspace of
weight k under this S1 action.

  The main result of [Cos11], in this situation, says the following.

Proposition. The obstructions to lifting a theory in T <( g,R) ( X ) to T ≤( g,R) ( X ) lies in
                                                        (2−2g− R)w
                                  H (d−3)(2g−2)+1 (VR                ).

The cohomological shift by (d − 3)(2g − 2) arises because the functionals Ig,h,n [ L] have co-
homological degree (d − 3)(2g − 2 + h), and the (d − 3)h shift is already account for in the
definition of Oadm,loc
               0       (Ec,∞ ). The weight under the S1 action reflects the weight required to have
     1
an S -invariant quantization.

  In addition, if the obstruction vanishes, the set of possible lifts up to homotopy is a torsor for
                (2−2g− R)w
H (d−3)(2g−2) (VR          ).

  More generally, the simplicial set of possible lifts is a torsor for the Dold-Kan simplicial
                                                   (2−2g− R)w
Abelian group associated to the cochain complex VR            [(d − 3)(2g − 2)].

  The theorem will follow from the following proposition.
52                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


                                      (k)
6.0.13 Proposition. The complex VR has zero cohomology unless k = 0, and
                         (0)
                   H ∗ (VR ) = HdR
                                ∗
                                   ( X )[2d] ⊗ SymR C((t))[2 − d]∨ .
                                                                  


  This immediately provides a proof of the theorem. The point is that the obstruction-
deformation complex for lifting from T <( g,R) to T ≤( g,R) is V (2−2g− R) [(d − 3)(2g − 2)],
and according to the proposition this is zero if 2 − 2g − R 6= 0, showing that there is a
unique (up to contractible choice) lift to the next order.


6.1. Proof of the proposition. The proof of this proposition will occupy the rest of
this section.

  The results of [Cos11] allow us to describe the cohomology of the complexes of local
functionals in terms of jets of the space of fields. The space

                         E N = PV( X )[[t]][2] ⊕ Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl N [1]

of fields is the space of smooth sections of a graded vector bundle on X which we
denote EN . Let J ( EN ) denote the bundle of jets of EN , and for x ∈ X, let Jx ( EN ) denote
the fibre of this bundle at x. Concretely,

                       Jx ( EN ) = Jx (PV)[[t]][2] ⊕ Jx (Ω0,∗ ) ⊗ gl N [1]

where, if we choose coordinates near x, we can write the spaces of jets of polyvector
fields and of jets of the Dolbeault algebra as

                                 Jx (PV) = C[[zi , ∂i , z̄ j , dz̄ j ]]
                                Jx (Ω0,∗ ) = C[[zi , z̄ j , dz̄ j ]].

Here the generators dz̄ j and ∂i are of cohomological degree 1.

  Let O ( J ( EN )) denote the bundle on X of algebras of functionals modulo constants
on the bundle of jets. The fibre of O ( J ( EN )) at x is defined to be the completed non-
unital symmetric algebra of the topological dual of Jx ( EN ).

   Recall that sections of a jet bundle are always a D-module (or, equivalently, an
infinite-rank vector bundle with a flat connection). Here D is the sheaf of smooth
differential operators. If we choose local coordinates on a neighbourhood U of x ∈ X,
we can trivialize the jet bundles near x (as above). The sections of the jet bundle on U
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                             53


can be described as

           Γ(U, J ( EN )) = C ∞ (U )⊗
                                    b Jx ( E N )
                          = C ∞ (U )[[zi , ∂i , z̄ j , dz̄ j , t]] ⊕ C ∞ (U )[[zi , z̄ j , dz̄ j ]] ⊗ gl N .
In local coordinates, the algebra D (U ) of differential operators on U is
                                                            
                                          ∞         ∂ ∂
                               D (U ) = C (U )        ,        .
                                                   ∂zi ∂z̄ j
The sub-algebra C ∞ (U ) of D (U ) acts on Γ(U, J ( EN )) in the evident way. Thus, the
D-module structure, in coordinates, is determined by the action of the commutative
algebra C[ ∂z∂ i , ∂∂z̄ j ] of constant-coefficient differential operators. By the Leibniz rule, it
suffices to say how these constant-coefficient operators act on constant sections of the
jet bundle in our chosen trivialization. In the concrete expression given above for the
space Jx ( EN ) of constant sections, the action of ∂z∂ i and ∂∂z̄ j on J0 (PV) and J0 (Ω0,∗ ) is
given by minus the evident derivations.

   With these conventions, one checks that a flat section of J ( EN ) – that is one anni-
hilated by all the ∂z∂ i and ∂∂z̄ j – is precisely the jet of an actual smooth section of the
bundle EN .

   By naturality, the bundle of algebras O ( J ( EN )) is a D-module as well. Then, there
is an isomorphism of graded vector spaces

                           Oloc (Ec,N ) ∼
                                        = Γ( X, Ωd,d ⊗ D O ( J ( EN ))).
Here Ωd,d refers to the sheaf of top forms on X, which is a right D-module. We are
tensoring the sheaf of right modules Ωd,d with the sheaf of left modules O ( J ( EN ))
over the sheaf of differential operators D, and then taking global sections.

  Let Oadm ( J ( E∞ )) be the bundle of admissible sequences of functions (in the same
sense as before, and recall that it is defined modulo constants) on the sequence of
bundles J ( EN ). Let Oadm
                        0 ( J ( E )) be the same thing but with the shift in cohomological
                                 ∞
degree described above, whereby functions of weight h are shifted by [(d − 3)h]. Then,
the space of admissible functionals Oadm,loc
                                          0    (Ec,∞ ) has a similar description,
                         0
                        Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ ) ∼                 0
                                         = Γ( X, Ωd,d ⊗ D Oadm ( J ( E∞ ))).

  It turns out (see [Cos11]) that the D-module of functions on jets is always flat, so
that we can replace the actual tensor product by the derived tensor product to find a
54                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


quasi-isomorphism
                       0
                      Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ ) ≃ Γ( X, Ωd,d ⊗L  0
                                                     D Oadm ( J ( E∞ ))).

Finally, using the canonical Spencer resolution of the right D-module Ωd,d by flat D-
modules one finds a quasi-isomorphism
                        0
                       Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ ) ≃ Ω∗,∗ ( X, Oadm
                                                     0
                                                         ( J ( E∞ ))[2d].

On the right hand side we have the de Rham complex of X with coefficients in the
D-module Oadm ( J ( E∞ )), with a shift by 2d.

   We let
(†)
          Symi J (PV[[t]])[2]∨ ⊗ Sym j Cyc J (Ω0,∗ )∨ [−1] [d − 3] ⊂ Oadm
                                                                      0
        M                                                       
WR =                                                                      ( J ( E∞ )).
      i+ j= R

Then, WR is the D-module version of the complex VR ⊂ Oadm,loc
                                                      0       (Ec,∞ ), and we have a
quasi-isomorphism
                             VR ∼
                                = Ω∗,∗ ( X, WR )[2d].

  If we want to compute the cohomology of VR , we can use a spectral sequence ar-
gument. Since Ω∗,∗ ( X, WR ) is a double complex, with one differential coming from
that on the dg D-module WR and the other being the de Rham differential, we can
apply the spectral sequence for a double complex. This yields a convergent spectral
sequence of the form
                              q
                           HdR ( X, H p (WR )) ⇒ H p+q−2d (VR ).

 To compute the first page of this spectral sequence, we need to compute the coho-
mology of the dg D-module WR . We find the following.

6.1.1 Proposition. The cohomology of WR is the trivial D-module with fibre the space SymR (C((t))[2 −
d ] ∨ ).


Proof of the proposition. We will compute the cohomology of WR locally on X, in local
coordinates. So let us assume for now that X = Cd , and work near the origin 0 ∈ Cd .
Let J0 ( E∞ ) denote the fibre of the jet bundle at the origin, and consider the space
Oadm
  0 ( J ( E )) of admissible functionals. Inside this we have the fibre W
        0   ∞                                                            R,0 of WR at the
origin. We will compute the cohomology of WR,0 .
                           QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                       55


  We can write
          0                                         d Cyc J0 (Ω0,∗ )∨ [−1] [d − 3]
         Oadm ( J0 ( E∞ )) = O ( J0 (PV[[t]])[2]) ⊗ Sym
                                                                                  


modulo constants and

                   Symi J0 (PV[[t]])[2]∨ ⊗ Sym j Cyc J0 (Ω0,∗ )∨ [−1] [d − 3] ⊂ Oadm
                                                                                 0
          M                                                                
WR,0 =                                                                               ( J0 ( E∞ )).
         i+ j= R

We will prove that the cohomology of WR,0 is isomorphic to SymR (C((t))[−d]). The
differential on the whole complex preserves the decomposition into the product of the
spaces WR,0 , so this will prove the result.

  Let us filter WR,0 by saying that F k is the subspace which can be expressed in this
way where i ≤ k.

   The differential on our complex has four terms. Two of these terms come from the
linear differentials ∂ + t∂ on PV[[t]] and ∂ on Ω0,∗ ; the other two come from bracketing
with the classical action functionals I0,1,0 and I0,1,1 .

   All these terms preserve this filtration, and on the associated graded we forget the
term coming from I0,1,1 .

   In the first page of the spectral sequence associated to the filtration F k , we thus need
to compute the cohomology of the complexes (†) with the differential arising from the
linear differentials on PV[[t]] and Ω0,∗ , and from the classical action functional I0,1,0 .

  The key fact we need is that the term in the differential corresponding to I0,1,0 gives
precisely the differential on the cyclic cochain complex of the commutative algebra

                                      J0 Ω0,∗ = C[[zi , z̄i , dz̄i ]].

This follows from Tsygan and Loday-Quillen’s theorem on cyclic homology [Tsy83,
LQ84]. As, I0,1,0 comes from the holomorphic Chern-Simons interaction on gl N , and
thus gives the Chevalley-Eilenberg differential on C ∗ ( J0 Ω0,∗ ⊗ gl N ). Tsygan and Loday-
Quillen show that as N → ∞ this becomes the cyclic differential.

  So, we see that the cohomology of the associated graded is

                Symi H ∗ J0 PV [[t]][2]∨ ⊗ Sym j HC ∗ ( J0 Ω0,∗ )[d − 4]
                                                                        


where HC ∗ refers to cyclic cohomology.
56                                 KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


  Now, we apply the Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg theorem to compute cyclic coho-
mology of J0 Ω0,∗ . J0 Ω0,∗ is quasi-isomorphic to the power series algebra C[[zi ]]. Thus,
we find that cyclic homology of J0 Ω0,∗ is
                                                                        
                     HC∗ ( J0 Ω0,∗ ) = t−1 C[[zi , dzi ]][t−1 ][−2], tddR .

Here, dzi is of cohomological degree −1. Thus, cyclic homology is built from forms on
the formal disc Spec C[[zi ]].

   Now, because we are working on a Calabi-Yau, we can use the volume form to iden-
tify forms with polyvector fields. Let PV( D b d ) denote holomorphic polyvector fields
on the d-dimensional formal disc Spec C[[zi ]]. Then, we can rewrite cyclic homology
as
                       HC∗ ( J0 Ω0,∗ ) = t−1 PV( D b d )[t−1 ][d − 2]
with differential t∂. Taking into account the degree shifting of h(d − 3) which we’ve
been carrying along, we have shown that the fiber of associated graded of our complex
is quasi-isomorphic to
                                                                           ∨
             Ω0∗,∗ [2d] ⊗C SymR PV( D b n )[[t]][2] ⊕ t−1 PV( D
                                                              b n )[t−1 ][2] .


  The differential is t∂ on each summand, but it does not map t−1 PV( D
                                                                      b n )[t−1 ][2] to
PV( D
    b n )[[t]][2].

6.1.2 Lemma. The differential on the next page of the spectral sequence arises from the map
                              ct∂ : t−1 PV( D
                                            b n )[2] → PV( D
                                                           bn)

where c is a non-zero constant.

Remark: The constant c is in fact determined by the annulus anomaly cancellation con-
dition. See Theorem 7.2.2.

Proof. The differential on the next page of the spectral sequence is given by { I 1−disk , −}C .
The closed string BV bracket {−, −}C is represented by the kernel of the operator
∂ : PV( X ) → PV( X ), which is (∂ ⊗ 1)δDiag where δDiag is the δ-current on the diag-
onal of X × X, viewed as a polyvector field via the isomorphism between forms and
polyvector fields. In particular, it only involves the component t0 PV( X ) of the full
closed string fields PV( X )[[t]]. For µ ∈ PV( X ),
                                       Z
                 I 1−disk (µ, A) = c           Tr( A ∧ ∂A ∧ · · · ∧ ∂A) ∧ (µ ` Ω X )
                                           X
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                            57


which represents the natural pairing between PV( X ) and the hochschild chains of
Ω0,∗ ( X ). It follows that { I 1−disk , −}C is the dual of
                               η : Cyc(Ω0,∗ ( X )) → PV( X )
where η ( A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Ak ) is identified with c(∂A1 ∧ · · · ∧ ∂Ak ) under the natural isomor-
phism between PV( X ) and Ω∗,∗ ( X ) with respect to Ω X . The lemma is a local statement
of this at a fiber of the jets.

                                                                                            

  This lemma shows that, after taking cohomology on this page of the spectral se-
quence, we find
                                                              ∨
                  WR,0 ≃ SymR (C · (∂1 ∧ · · · ∧ ∂d )((t))[2]) .
as desired. It is easy to verify that the D-module structure on the bundle with fibre
WR,0 is trivial, thus completing the proof of the proposition.                     

   This completes the proof of the theorem that the map T ≤( g,R) → T <( g,R) is a
weak homotopy equivalence as long as 2g − 2 + R > 0. That is, once we have con-
structed I0,2,0 [ L], then we obtain a unique (up to homotopy) quantization Ig,h,n [ L] for
all ( g, h, n).


6.2. Theorem A on Cd . In this section, X will denote the Calabi-Yau manifold Cd , with
linear coordinate z1 , · · · , zd . The holomorphic volume form is chosen to be
                                   Ω X = dz1 ∧ · · · ∧ dzd .
Let us explain in this section how to modify Theorem A proved above, stating that
there is a quantization beyond the annulus level, to the case of Cd , where we in addi-
tion assume that our theory is translation invariant.

  We choose the standard Kähler metric 2i ∑id=1 dzi ∧ dz̄i to define our gauge fixing.

  A quantum BCOV theory on Cd is translation invariant if each Ig,h,n [ L] is invariant
under the action of the Abelian group Cd acting on everything. We need a stronger
notion of translation invariance called holomorphic translation invariance.

  Notice that our spaces of fields on Cd are of the form
                                   E N = Ω0,∗ (Cd ) ⊗ VN
58                                     KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


where VN is the graded vector space

                                  VN = gl N [1] ⊕ C[∂i ][[t]][2]

where the variables ∂i , for i = 1, . . . , d, have degree +1.

   The operator ι ∂z of contracting with the vector field ∂zi maps Ω0,k (Cd ) to Ω0,k−1 (Cd )
                    i
by removing one copy of dzi with the appropriate sign. The Cartan homotopy formula
tells us that                                h     i
                                          L∂z = ∂, ι ∂z .
                                                 i         i

The operator ι ∂z extends to an operator on the space of fields Ω0,∗ (Cd ) ⊗ VN by ten-
                 i
soring with the identity on VN , and satisfies the commutation relation
                                            h         i
                                   L∂ z = Q N , ι ∂ z
                                             i                 i

where Q N is the linear differential on the space of fields.

   By naturality, the operators ι ∂z extend to derivations which we denote by same
                                      i
notation on the spaces of functionals on the space of fields. One can check that the
classical action functionals I0,1,0 and I0,1,1 satisfy

                                 ι ∂z I0,1,0 = 0     ι ∂z I0,1,1 = 0.
                                   i                   i

6.2.1 Lemma. The operators ι ∂z commute with the RG flow operator from scale e to scale L
                                i
and with the BV Laplacian of scale L on the space O (Ec,N )[[λ]]+ . Further, ι ∂z is a derivation
                                                                                 i
for the scale L BV Poisson bracket.


Proof. This follows from the fact that ι ∂z commutes with the order two differential
                                                  i
operators 4O L , 4 C, ∂
                   L    P(e,L) O and ∂ P(e,L) C .                                 

6.2.2 Definition. A quantum BCOV theory on Cd (working, as usual, modulo N) is holo-
morphically translation invariant if it is translation invariant and if each I [ L] is in the ker-
nel of the operators ι ∂z . Let T (Cd ) denote the simplicial set of holomorphically translation-
                       i
invariant and U (d)-invariant quantum BCOV theories on Cd , working modulo N. As in
definition 6.0.9 let T <(G,R) (Cd ) and T ≤(G,R) (Cd ) denote the corresponding simplicial sets
where we work up to order < ( G, R) or ≤ ( G, R).

Remark: By U (d) invariance we mean a theory that is SU (d) invariant and where under
the remaining S1 in U (d), which scales the volume form on Cd with weight d, each
Ig,h,n [ L] is of weight −d(2g − 2 + h).
                          QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                      59


   We will prove that there is a unique holomorphically translation-invariant BCOV
theory on any Cd (where d is odd). The first step is to prove, just as we did for theo-
ries without the holomorphic translation-invariant condition, that once we construct
a quantization at the level of annuli we automatically get a full quantization. This
follows from the next theorem, which is the analog in this context of theorem 6.0.10.

6.2.3 Theorem. For ( g, R) with g > 0 or g = 0, R ≥ 3, the map

                                 T ≤( g,R) (Cd ) → T <( g,R−1) (Cd )

is a weak equivalence.

   The proof is along the lines of the proof of theorem 6.0.10, and will take the rest of
this section. We will analyze the obstruction-deformation complex for quantizing the
holomorphically translation invariant theory. As above let

                                    VN = gl N [1] ⊕ C[∂i ][[t]][2].

In the notation of the proof of 6.0.10 we defined

                         EN = VN [dzi ] = gl N [dzi ][1] + C[∂ j , dzi ][[t]][2]

so that our space of fields is the space of sections of the trivial bundle on Cd with fibre
EN . Here dzi and ∂i have cohomological degree 1, and the indices i, j run from 1 to d.

  Let

                                     J0 ( EN ) = EN [[zi , z j ]]
                                               = VN [[zi , z j , dzk ]]

be the fibre at zero of the jet bundle associated to the trivial bundle with fibre EN . In
the proof of theorem 6.0.10 we saw how to express the obstruction-deformation com-
plex for quantizing BCOV theory in terms of a D-module built from the complex of
admissible functions on J0 ( EN ). We will do something similar for the holomorphically
translation-invariant case.

  Note that J0 ( EN ) is acted on by the Abelian Lie algebra C2d spanned by ∂z∂ i and
 ∂
∂z j , by differentiating formal power series in the evident way. This is the Lie algebra
of complexified translations on Cd . It is also acted on by the larger Abelian graded
Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1] whose odd elements are spanned by ∂dz
                                                            ∂
                                                               i
                                                                                 ∂
                                                                 . The operator ∂dz i
60                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


is the same as the operator of contracting with ∂z∂ i ; we use the notation ∂dz
                                                                             ∂
                                                                                i
                                                                                  to avoid
confusion at this stage.

  As in the proof of theorem 6.0.10 we let O ( J0 ( EN )) denote the functionals modulo
constants on EN , which is the non-unital completed symmetric algebra of the dual
of J0 ( EN ). By naturality, O ( J0 ( EN )) is acted on by the Abelian graded Lie algebra
C2d ⊕ Cd [1] which acts on J0 ( EN ). Let
                                                                         
                                 ∂ ∂                         ∂ ∂       ∂
                   UC2d = C          ,      , UC2d|d = C       ,     ,
                                ∂zi ∂z̄ j                   ∂zi ∂z̄ j ∂dz̄k
denote the universal enveloping algebra for the Abelian Lie algebra C2d and C2d ⊕
Cd [1] respectively.

  Hom( J0 ( EN ), C) is the space of translation-invariant differential operators from the
space E N of fields to the space C ∞ (Cd ). Any sequence of elements
                               D1 , . . . , Dn ∈ Hom( J0 ( EN ), C)
of such differential operators gives rise to a translation-invariant local functional on
Ec,N by the formula           Z
                            e 7→
                                   Cd
                                        ∏ dzi ∏ dzi D1 (e) . . . Dn (e)
for e ∈ Ec,N .

     This expression gives rise to an identification

                                                       = Oloc (Ec,N )C
                                                                       d
                            Ω0d,d ⊗UC2d O ( J0 ( EN )) ∼
between translation-invariant local functionals and the tensor product of the left mod-
ule O ( J0 ( EN )) over UC2d with the trivial right module of rank one Ω0d,d . (We think of
Ω0d,d as the space of translation invariant (d, d)-forms on Cd ). Tensoring over UC2d has
the effect of removing those Lagrangians which are total derivatives.

   There is a similar description of holomorphically translation invariant local func-
tionals using UC2d|d instead. Since the Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1] acts on Ω0,∗ (Cd ), the
universal enveloping algebra UC2d|d of this Lie algebra does as well, and by differen-
tial operators. The algebra UC2d|d is precisely the algebra of differential operators from
Ω0,∗ (Cd ) to itself which commute with the action of the extended translation Lie alge-
bra C2d ⊕ Cd [1] (whose odd elements act on Ω0,∗ (Cd ) by contraction with the vector
fields ∂z∂ i ). We can thus think of A as being the algebra of constant-coefficient differen-
tial operators on the graded manifold whose functions are Ω0,∗ (Cd ).
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                            61


  In a similar way, we can consider the differential operators

                                E N = Ω0,∗ (Cd , VN ) → Ω0,∗ (Cd )

which are constant-coefficient, in the sense that they commute with the action of the
graded Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1]. The collection of such differential operators will be
denoted by DiffC ⊕C [1] (E N , Ω0,∗ (Cd )). Every such constant-coefficient operator is ob-
                  2d    d


tained by combining a linear map VN → C with an element of UC2d|d , which differen-
tiates the variables zi , z j and dzk .

  Thus, we have natural isomorphisms

                 DiffC ⊕C [1] (E N , Ω0,∗ (Cd )) = Hom(VN , UC2d|d )
                       2d   d



                                                      = Hom(VN [[zi , z j , dzk ]], C)
                                                      = J0 ( EN )∨ .

Here we are using the fact that we can identify UC2d|d with the linear dual of the power
series algebra C[[zi , z j , dzk ]].

  Thus, J0 ( EN )∨ is the space of differential operators from E N → Ω0,∗ which commute
with the action of the graded Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1].

  If D1 , . . . , Dn ∈ J0 ( EN )∨ are such differential operators, we can construct a holomor-
phically translation-invariant local functional on E N by the formula
                                   Z
                            e 7→
                                       Cd
                                            ∏ dzi D1 (e) ∧ · · · ∧ Dn (e).
On the right hand side we are wedging the elements Di (e) ∈ Ω0,∗ (Cd ) and integrating
against the holomorphic volume form. Since the integration map in the Dolbeault
complex is of cohomological degree −d, this map is of degree −d.

  This gives us a map

                    Ω0d,0 ⊗ ∏ Symn ( J0 ( EN )∨ )[d] → Oloc (E N )C ⊕C [1]
                                                                             2d   d


                            n >0

(on the right hand side, we are using the fact that holomorphically translation-invariant
local functionals are precisely those invariant under the graded Lie algebra C2d ⊕
Cd [1]).
62                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   There is some redundancy in this description of holomorphically translation-invariant
local functionals, because of total derivatives. If we take care of this, we find an iso-
morphism

                                                       = Oloc (E N )C ⊕C [1] .
                                                                          d
                       Ω0d,0 ⊗U 2d|d O ( J0 ( EN ))[d] ∼
                                                                     2d

                                C



Here the line Ω0d,0 of translation-invariant (d, 0)-forms is made into a right UC2d|d -
module in the trivial way.

   We will use this description of holomorphically translation-invariant local function-
als to compute the obstruction-deformation complex for quantizing the theory on Cd .



6.3. Admissible functions. As discussed earlier, we let Oadm ( J0 ( E∞ ) denote sequences
of admissible functions on J0 ( EN ), and we let Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ ) denote admissible se-
quences of local functions on Ec,N . We let Oadm
                                               0 ( J ( E ) and O 0
                                                    0   ∞          adm,loc (Ec,∞ ) denote the
same objects, except where the cohomological degree of the space of functions of
weight h is shifted by [h(d − 3)]. Everything in sight has an action of U (d) = SU (d) ×
S1 . We change the S1 action, as in the proof of theorem 6.0.10, on Oadm     0 ( J ( E ) and
                                                                                   0  ∞
Oadm,loc (Ec,∞ ) so that the S action on polyvector fields is the natural action on forms
  0                           1

by pull-back, where we identify polyvector fields and differential forms using a cho-
sen holomorphic volume form.

   The graded vector space Oadm  0     J0 ( EN )) has a differential, as in the proof of theorem
6.0.10, arising from the linear differential Q on the space E N of fields together with
bracketing with I0,1,0 and I0,1,1 . Similarly the space Oadm,loc0     (Ec,N ) of local functionals
has a differential. The Lie algebra C ⊕ C [1] of extended translations has a differ-
                                             2d     d

ential too, which sends ∂dz∂
                             i
                               to ∂z∂ i . The Cartan homotopy formula (see above) tells us
that the dg Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1] acts on the cochain complexes Oadm,loc (Ec,N ) and
O ( J0 ( EN )) in a way compatible with the differentials. It follows that the sub-space
of invariants under the Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1] is a sub-complex of Oloc (Ec,N ) of local
functionals. The discussion above now tells us that we have an isomorphism

                                                                (Ec,∞ )C ⊕C [1]
                                                                           d
                                     ( J0 ( E∞ ))[d] ∼
                                                                        2d
                   Ω0d,0 ⊗UC2dd Oadm
                                 0                      0
                                                     = Oadm,loc

of cochain complexes. Here we must treat UC2dd as a dg commutative algebra, the
universal enveloping algebra of the dg Lie algebra C2d ⊕ Cd [1].
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                         63


  Now, Oadm
          0 ( J ( E )) is a flat U
               0   ∞              C2dd -module so we can replace the tensor product by a
derived tensor product. This gives us a quasi-isomorphism
                        L
                                                               (Ec,∞ )C ⊕C [1] .
                                                                         2d   d
                 Ω0d,0 ⊗U 2d|d
                                0
                               Oadm                    0
                                    ( J0 ( E∞ ))[d] ≃ Oadm,loc
                          C



   The dg algebra UC2d|d is quasi-isomorphic to the sub-algebra C[ ∂z∂ i ] of constant-
coefficient holomorphic differential operators. This implies that we have a quasi-
isomorphism

                 Ω0d,0 ⊗L                                   (Ec,∞ )C ⊕C [1] .
                                                                         2d   d
                              O 0 ( J ( EN ))[d] ≃ Oadm,loc
                        C[ ∂ ] adm 0
                                                    0
                           ∂zi


Using a standard resolution of Ω0d,0 as a right C[ ∂z∂ i ]-module leads us to a quasi-isomorphism

                                                           (Ec,∞ )C ⊕C [1] .
                     0                             0                2d    d
                    Oadm ( J0 ( EN ))[dzi ][2d] ≃ Oadm,loc
On the left hand side of this quasi-isomorphism the complex Oadm       0 ( J ( E ))[dz ] is
                                                                            0   ∞     i
equipped with the de Rham differential as well as the internal differential on Oadm
                                                                                  0 ( J ( E )).
                                                                                        0   ∞
In other words, the left hand side of this equation is the translation-invariant subcom-
plex of the holomorphic de Rham complex of Cd with coefficients in the dg D-module
Oadm
  0 ( J ( E )).
       0   ∞



6.4. Completion of the proof. Let

                                                 (Ec,∞ )C ⊕C [1]
                                         0                 2d   d
                                 Vh,n ⊂ Oadm,loc

be the subcomplex of holomorphically translation-invariant local functionals on Cd
spanned by functionals of weight h and homogeneous of degree n as a function of the
closed string inputs. Let
                                               M
                                       VR =            Vh,n .
                                              h+n= R

                               (Ec,∞ )C ⊕C [1] and has an S1 action induced from that on
                                       2d d
VR is a subcomplex of Oadm,loc
                       0

the larger complex. Let
                                             0
                                     Wh,n ⊂ Oadm ( J0 ( E∞ )
be defined analogously to Vh,n , and let
                                               M
                                      WR =             Wh,n .
                                              h+n= R

Then, there is a quasi-isomorphism

                          VR ≃ (WR ⊗ C[dzi ][2d], dWR + ddR ) .
64                                     KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


           (k)        (k)
  Let WR and VR denote the subspaces of WR and VR where the S1 inside U (d) acts
by weight k.

  The obstruction theory developed in [Cos11] tells us that the obstruction to lifting a
theory in T <( g,R) (Cd ) to one in T ≤( g,R) (Cd ) is an element in the SU (d)-invariants in
                                                       −(2g−2+ R)d
                                   H (d−3)(2g−2)+1 (VR               )

and that if there is no obstruction, the set of lifts is a torsor for the SU (d)-invariants in
                −(2g−2+ R)d
H (d−3)(2g−2) (VR           ).
                                 (k)
     We will show that H ∗ (VR ) = 0 if k < 0, thus completing the proof of the theorem.

   There is a spectral sequence which allows us to compute the cohomology of VR in
terms of that of WR , of the form

                                   H ∗ (WR )[dzi ][2d] ⇒ H ∗ (VR ).

We know from 6.1.1 that

                                H ∗ (WR ) = SymR (C((t))[2 − d]∨ )

and that the U (d) action on this is trivial. It follows immediately that the cohomology
of VR is concentrated in non-negative S1 -weights, as desired.

     This completes the proof of the theorem.


                            7. A NNULUS ANOMALY CANCELLATION

  To complete the proof of the existence and uniqueness of the quantum BCOV theory
on X = Cd , it remains to prove that we can construct the theory at the annulus level.
We will do this in this section.

   Since we need to analyze the theory on Cd very explicitly to prove this result, it will
be helpful to write out explicitly the regularized kernels for BV operators and prop-
agators. We choose the standard Kähler metric 2i ∑id=1 dzi ∧ dz̄i to define our gauge
fixing. Then, we have
                                           d                     d
                      1
           K CL =
                    (4πL)d
                           e −|z−w|2 /4L
                                         ∏ i  ( d z̄ − d w̄ i ∏ ( ∂zi − ∂wi ) ∈ PV( X × X ),
                                                             )
                                         i =1                  i =1
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                65

                                                                                   q
where {zi }, {wi } denote linear coordinates on X × X, and |z − w| = ∑id=1 |zi − wi |2 .
The closed string BV operator ∆O   L is the second order operator associated to the kernel
                             d                               d
                                  z̄i − w̄i
                                            
                       1
                    (4πL)d i∑                               ∏(dz̄ j − dw̄ j ) ∏(∂zj − ∂wj ),
                C                               −|z−w|2 /4L
     ( ∂ ⊗ 1) K L =                           e
                             =1
                                      4L                    j =1              j 6 =i

and the closed string propagator P(e, L)C is the kernel
Z L                  Z L             d               z̄ j − w̄ j
                                         z̄i − w̄i
                                                                
        ∗                     1
                                   ∑                                e−|z−w| /4t ∏(dz̄k − dw̄k ) ∏(∂zk − ∂wk ).
                C                                                          2
    dt(∂ ∂ ⊗ 1)Kt =      dt      d
 e                    e     (4πt) i,j=1      4t            4t                   k 6 =i          k6= j

Similarly, the BV operator for the open string ∆O
                                                L is associated to the kernel
                                   d
              1
     KO
      L =
            (4πL)d
                   e −|z−w|2 /4L
                                 ∏    (dz̄i − dw̄i ) ⊗ IdglN ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X × X ) ⊗ (gl N ⊗ gl N ),
                                 i =1
                N
where IdglN = ∑i,j =1 eij ⊗ e ji ∈ gl N ⊗ gl N , eij the matrix with entry 1 at the i-th row and
j-th column and zero otherwise. The open string propagator P(e, L)O is the kernel
   Z L                   Z L              d 
                                                 z̄i − w̄i
                                                           
           ∗                        1
                                          ∑                  e−|z−w| /4t ∏(dz̄ j − dw̄ j ) ⊗ IdglN .
                   O                                                2
       dt(∂ ⊗ 1)K L =        dt         d
    e                     e      (4πt) i=1           4t                  j 6 =i


   In the previous section, we have reduced the construction of quantization of open-
closed BCOV theory to I0,2,0 [ L], the annulus functional with two boundaries and with-
out closed string inputs. We need to do two things: first, show that any possible
anomalies to constructing I0,2,0 (satisfying the master equation) vanish. And secondly,
show that there is no ambiguity to constructing I0,2,0 [ L].

   The first thing we need to do is to compute the cohomology groups controlling
quantization to the annulus level. Let Vg,h,n refer to the obstruction-deformation group
controlling possible terms in the action functional of type ( g, h, n). Thus, Vg,h,n is built
from certain holomorphically translation-invariant functionals of weight h, with n
closed string inputs, which are SU (d)-invariant and have the correct scaling weight
under S1 ⊂ U (d). Since I0,2,0 has cohomology degree 0, we see that at the annulus
level, H 1 (V0,2,0 ) describes obstructions and H 0 (V0,2,0 ) describes deformations.

7.0.1 Proposition. We have H i (V0,2,0 ) = 0 if i ≤ 0, and H 1 (V0,2,0 ) is of dimension (d −
                                                            ∗
1)/2. The possible anomalies are the functionals of A ∈ Ω0,
                                                         c (C , gl N )
                                                              d
                                  Z                          
                           A 7→ Tr ( A(∂A)r ) Tr (∂A)d−r
66                                   KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


for 1 ≤ r ≤ (d − 1)/2.


Proof. The relevant obstruction-deformation complex is the holomorphically translation-
invariant local functionals just of the open-string fields, which are admissible of weight
2. The differential is ∂ + { I0,1,0 , −}O .

   Let us first describe the complex of holomorphically translation-invariant local func-
tionals for the open string sector. The space of fields in this case is just Ω0,∗ (Cd , gl N )[1].
The space of jets at the origin of fields is

                       J0 (Ω0,∗ (Cd , gl N ))[1] = C[[zi , z j , dzk ]] ⊗ gl N [1].

Using the discussion in the proof of theorem 6.2.3, we find that for the gl N holomorphic
Chern-Simons gauge theory the complex of holomorphically translation-invariant lo-
cal functionals is

(†)                       Ω0d,0 ⊗L      C ∗ (C[[zi , z j , dzk ]] ⊗ gl N )[d]
                                 C[∂zi ] red

        ∗ indicates the reduced Chevalley-Eilenberg cochain complex of the dg Lie
where Cred
algebra C[[zi , z j , dzk ]] ⊗ gl N . The differential of the dg Lie algebra is the jet of the ∂
operator which sends z j → dz j .

  Since C[[zi ]] ⊗ gl N is a quasi-isomorphic sub dg Lie algebra which is preserved by
the operators ∂z∂ i , we find that a complex quasi-isomorphic to (†) is

(‡)                           Ω0d,0 ⊗L      C ∗ (C[[zi ]] ⊗ gl N )[d].
                                     C[∂zi ] red

Since we are looking at admissible functionals (as N varies), the Tsygan-Loday-Quillen
theorem tells us that we can replace Lie algebra cochains by the symmetric alge-
bra of cyclic cochains of C[[zi ]]. Let Ω−∗  b d denote the algebra of differential forms on
                                             D
the formal d-disc, graded so that i-forms are in degree −i. The Hochschild-Kostant-
Rosenberg theorem tells us that the cyclic cohomology of C[[zi ]] is the dual of the
complex Ω−∗ ( D b d )[t−1 ], with differential tddR . Here t is a parameter of degree 2.

  We thus find that the complex of all admissible holomorphically translation-invariant
functionals is
                                 Ω0d,0 ⊗L
                                        C[ ∂ zi ]
                                                  O (Ω−∗     −1
                                                      b d [ t ][1])[ d ]
                                                      D

where O indicates functionals modulo constants.
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                              67


  Our obstruction-deformation complex is the subcomplex of weight 2, namely
                                                              ∨
                       Ω0d,0 ⊗L
                              C[ ∂ zi ]
                                        Sym2
                                               Ω −∗ −1
                                                 bd
                                                 D
                                                    [ t ][ 1 ]    [ d ].


  The linear dual of the space C[[zi ]] is the algebra D0 = C[ ∂z∂ i ] of constant-coefficient
holomorphic differential operators. It follows that the linear dual of Ω−∗       b d is D0 [ αi ]
                                                                                 D
where the variables αi have weight +1. Therefore we can write our obstruction-
deformation complex as

                             Ω0d,0 ⊗L     2
                                    D0 Sym ( D0 [[ αi , t ]][−1]) [ d ].

Since tensor powers of D0 are flat as D0 -modules we can replace the derived tensor
product by an actual tensor product. Let us also replace the symmetric square by the
tensor square for now; we will take the invariants for the group S2 at the end.

  There is a natural isomorphism

                             Ω0d,0 ⊗ D0 ( D0 ⊗ D0 ) ∼
                                                    = Ω0d,0 ⊗C D0 .

Thus, we find that our obstruction complex is the S2 -invariants in the complex

(7.0.1)                   Ω0d,0 ⊗C (C[[αi , t]] ⊗C D0 [[αi , t]]) [d − 2].

This complex has a differential arising from that on the D0 -module D0 [[αi , t]] dual to
Ω−∗      −1
  b d [ t ]. We will ignore this differential for now, and just describe the elements which
  D
are U (d)-invariant (which, of course, is what we’re interested in).

   Under the U (d)-action, the odd variables αi transform like ∂z∂ i , so that the exterior
algebra C[αi ] is the constant poly-vector fields. Thus, under the S1 ⊂ U (d) which
scales Cd , the variables αi have weight −1 and the variables ∂z∂ i generating D0 = C[ ∂z∂ i ]
also have weight −1. The basis dz1 . . . dzd of Ω0d,0 has weight d. Therefore, the total
number of αi and ∂z∂ j that must appear is d.

   Invariant theory for SU (d) tells us that the space of invariants in the dth tensor
power of the defining representation Cd is of rank one, and spanned by the top exte-
rior power. Therefore, to be invariant under SU (d), an element in C[[αi ]]⊗2 ⊗ C[ ∂z∂ i ]
of weight d must be totally antisymmetric. This means that at most one ∂z∂ i can ap-
pear, because the representation C[ ∂z∂ i ] of SU (d) is Sym∗ Cd and SU (d) invariants in
Symk Cd ⊗ (Cd )d−k is zero if 2 ≤ k ≤ d.
68                                        KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


  We can now describe the U (d) invariants in the complex in equation 7.0.1. For
any subset I of the set {1, . . . , d} let α I denote the product ∏i∈ I αi , and let α I c denote
the corresponding object associated to the complement I c of I. A basis for the U (d)
invariants is given by the elements

                                           ∑
                                                                                           2
                   ηr,k1 ,k2 =                                ±dVol ⊗ α I tk1 ⊗ α I c tk
                                 I ⊂{1,...,d}, with | I |=r

                                                                                                ∂
                   µr,k1 ,k2 =             ∑                  ±dVol ⊗ α I \i tk1 ⊗ α I c tk2
                                                                                               ∂zi
                                                                                                   .
                                 I ⊂{1,...,d} with | I |=r
                                            i∈ I

The elements ηr,k1 ,k2 are of degree 2 + 2k1 + 2k2 , and the elements µr1 ,k1 ,k2 are of degree
1 + 2k1 + 2k2 . The differential is of the form

                                  d(ηr,k1 ,k2 ) = µr,k1 ,k2 +1 ± µr,k1 +1,k2 .

We are only interested in the cohomology in degrees ≤ 1. In degrees ≤ 0, there are
no U (d)-invariant elements, and in degree 1 the U (d)-invariant elements are µr,0,0 for
0 ≤ r ≤ d. The elements µr,0,0 are closed, and the S2 -symmetry (which we have
been neglecting) sends µr,0,0 7→ ±µd−r,0,0 . It follows that the Z/2 and U (d)-invariant
cohomology in degree 1 is of dimension (d − 1)/2, as desired. It is direct to check that
these elements corresponds to the functionals described in the proposition.           


7.1. Cancelling of the anomaly. What we have shown so far is that there is a possible
anomaly to quantizing the theory to the annulus level, but that if the anomaly vanishes
the quantization is unique.

   In this subsection, we compute directly that the obstruction to constructing I0,2,0 [ L]
satisfying the relevant master equations vanishes.

  We need to recall some details of the construction of quantum field theories in
[Cos11], and some combinatorial facts about how to write the RG flow in terms of
graphs.

     We say a labelled graph is a graph Γ with the following extra structures:

      (1) Every edge (internal or external) is labelled by c or o, indicating whether it is a
          closed-string or open-string graph.
      (2) Every vertex v is labelled by numbers ( g, h, n). Also, n is the number of germs
          of closed-string edges incident to the vertex v. The set of germs of open-string
                             QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                     69


        edges incident to v is partitioned into h non-empty subsets, and each of these
        subsets is given a cyclic order.

We should imagine the vertex v as being associated to the topological type of Riemann
surface of genus g with h boundary components and n marked points in the interior.
Each of the boundary components has a certain number of marked points. By glu-
ing together these Riemann surfaces according to how they are marked, one finds a
new topological type of a Riemann surface which in turn has some genus, number of
boundary components, and number of interior marked points. This topological data is
labelled by numbers g(Γ), h(Γ) and n(Γ) which are determined by the combinatorics
of Γ. We call ( g(Γ), h(Γ), n(Γ)) the type of Γ.

   For instance, if all vertices of Γ are discs and there are no closed-string edges, then
Γ is a ribbon graph and g(Γ) and h(Γ) are obtained by the standard combinatorial
algorithm for thickening a ribbon graph into a topological surface.

  Suppose that
                                           I ∈ Oadm (Ec,∞ )[[λ]]+
is a series
                                                I = ∑ Ig,h,n λ2g+h
where Ig,h,n is admissible of weight h as a function of the open string fields and homo-
geneous of weight n as a function of closed string fields.

  Then for every labelled graph Γ we can construct
                         WΓ ( P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O,∞ , I ) ∈ Oadm (Ec,∞ )[[λ]]+
by placing, on each internal open-string edge, the open-string propagator P0 (e, L); on
each internal closed-string edge the closed string propagator PC (e, L); and on each
vertex of type ( g, h, n) the interaction Ig,h,n . The external lines are labelled with open
or closed string fields to produce an admissible function of the fields.

  Also, as explained in section 4, we can apply the open-closed RG flow
                               n                                      o
             WeL ( I ) = λ2 log exp λ∂ PO (e,L) + λ2 ∂ PC (e,L) exp I/λ2 .

This RG flow map can be expanded as a sum of graphs:
                                                                 1
    WeL ( I ) =              ∑                  λ2g(Γ)+h(Γ)
                                                              |Aut(Γ)|
                                                                       WΓ ( P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O,∞ , I ).
                  Γ connected labelled graphs
70                                              KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


7.2. Constructing the QFT explicitly. Let us now recall a little about how to construct
QFTs using the technology of [Cos11]. We will explain how one constructs our BCOV
theory up to the annulus level. We start with our classical action, which in this case is

                                              I classical = λI0,1,0 + λI0,1,1 .

One constructs I0,1,0 [ L] and I0,1,1 [ L] by

                 I0,1,0 [ L] = lim
                                 e →0
                                               ∑             WΓ ( P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O,∞ , I classical ).
                                         Γ of type (0,1,0)

Since every graph appearing in this sum is a tree, this limit exists. One constructs
I0,1,1 [ L] by the same kind of formula, and again every graph in the sum is a tree. It
is automatic that the quantum master equation holds for I0,1,0 [ L] and I0,1,1 [ L] modulo
higher-order terms.

     Next, we can try to construct I0,2,0 [ L]. The idea is that we first define
      naive
     I0,2,0 [ L] = lim
                 e →0
                               ∑             WΓ ( P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O,∞ , λI0,1,0 + λI0,1,1 + λ2 I0,2,0
                                                                                                  CT
                                                                                                        (e)),
                         Γ of type (0,2,0)

        CT ( e ) is a counter-term introduced to make the e → 0 limit exist. As ex-
where I0,2,0
                                      CT ( e ) is local, and is uniquely determined by the
plained in [Cos11], the functional I0,2,0
                                                                           CT ( e ) is ”purely
requirements that the e → 0 limit exists and that, as a functional of e, I0,2,0
singular”. (There is, generally, a choice involved in what it means for a function of e
to be purely singular, this choice is called a renormalization scheme in [Cos11]).

  One then checks whether or not I0,2,0naive [ L ] satisfies the quantum master equation

modulo higher order terms. If it does, then we are done. If not, the failure to satisfy
the QME will be given by some obstruction O0,2,0 [ L]. The limit lim L→0 O0,2,0 [ L] exists,
and is a local functional which we call O0,2,0 . The element O0,2,0 will be a closed ele-
ment of degree 1 in the obstruction-deformation complex (built from local functionals)
controlling quantizations of our theory.

   If the cohomology class of O0,2,0 is zero, so that O0,2,0 = dJ0,2,0 for some local func-
tional J0,2,0 , then we set

I0,2,0 [ L] = lim
              e →0
                           ∑             WΓ ( P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O,∞ , λI0,1,0 + λI0,1,1 + λ2 I0,2,0
                                                                                              CT
                                                                                                    (e) − λ2 J0,2,0 ).
                     Γ of type (0,2,0)

The fact that dJ0,2,0 = O0,2,0 implies that I0,2,0 [ L] now satisfies the master equation, and
we can proceed.
                          QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                      71


  On the other hand, if the cohomology class of O0,2,0 is non-zero, then we can not
proceed any further.

  Our goal in this section is to prove the following.
                            CT ( e ) vanish, and I naive [ L ] satisfies the quantum master
Theorem. The counter-terms I0,2,0                 0,2,0
equation.

  This will tell us that we can construct the theory uniquely on Cd at the annulus level,
and so proceed to construct the full theory uniquely by the cohomology cancellation
argument.

   In fact, what we find is that if we just consider the purely open theory, there is
an annulus anomaly, meaning that pure holomorphic Chern-Simons theory does not
exist. However, the open string anomaly is cancelled by a contribution from the closed
string sector.


7.2.1. Vanishing of counter term.

7.2.1 Lemma. The following limit exists

                   lim
                   e →0
                            ∑         WΓ ( P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O,∞ , I0,1,0 + I0,1,1 ).
                          Γ:annulus

Therefore we can choose I CT (e) = 0.


Proof. There are two types of annulus diagrams. The first one contains a closed string
propagator connecting two I0,1,1




                                C




Since there is no loop in the diagram, the limit under e → 0 exists.
72                               KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


     The second type is the one-loop diagram from open string sector.




To show that the counter-terms from the open-string sector vanish, it suffices to show
this for diagrams which are wheels, because every one-loop diagram is a wheel with
some trees grafted on and trees can not contribute any singularities. Recall also that
our Feynman diagrams are ribbon graphs. However, to show that the counter-terms
vanish, the ribbon structure on the graph does not play any role, so we will ignore this
for now.

   Consider the wheel diagram Γm with m + 1 vertices (and with any of ribbon graph
structures)
                                    QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                               73


                 A0                                      Am




     A1                                                                   Am-1




                        A2

     Its graph integral can be represented by
                                                              Z                       m                       m
            WΓm ( P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am ) =
                                                                  Cd ×···×Cd α=0
                                                                                     ∏ Aα ∧ dd z(α) ∏ P(e, L)Oα,α+1
                                                                                                          α =0

                             (α)
where z(α) = {zi }1≤i≤d are copies of holomorphic coordinates on Cd , dd z(α) =
 d        (α)                                                     ∗
∏ dzi           is the corresponding holomorphic n-form. Aα ∈ Ω0,
                                                               c (C ) lies on the copy
                                                                    n
i =1
of Cd with coordinate z(α) . P(e, L)O     α,α+1 is the regularized open sector propagator con-
                      (
necting the vertices z , z
                        α ) ( α + 1 ) , where we have identified z(m+1) with z(0) .

Claim. WΓm ( P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am ) = 0 if m < d.

                  m
     In fact, ∏ P(e, L)O
                       α,α+1 = 0 if m < d − 1 for degree reasons.
                 α =0

                                                                                  m
     To see this, consider the following factor in ∏ P(e, L)O
                                                            α,α+1
                                                                                 α =0
                                                                                                              !
                               m       d                                                               
                              ∏ ∑                                       ∏
                                                   (α)   ( α +1)                        (α)     ( α +1)
                                                 z̄i − z̄i                           dz̄ j − dz̄ j                .
                              α =0    i =1                              j 6 =i

If we change coordinates w(0) = z(0) , w(α) = z(α) − z(α−1) , 1 ≤ α ≤ m, then up to a
constant, it becomes
                        !                   !!                        !
                              m                    d      m                             m             d
                             ∑ V (α)         `∏          ∑ dw̄i                       ∏      V (α) ` ∏ dw̄i
                                                                     (α)                                              (α)

                             α =1                 i =1   α =1                         α =1           i =1
74                                                                      KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


                                    d          (α)
where V (α) = ∑ w̄i                                    ∂
                                                        (α) , and ` is the contraction.                            This contains (m + 1)(d − 1)
                                   i =1              ∂w̄i
     (α)
dw̄i ’s, which vanishes for m < d − 1 because it is a form of type (0, (m + 1)(d − 1))
on Cdm and (m + 1)(d − 1) > dm.

     If m = d − 1, it is a top (0, d(d − 1))-form. We can move V (α) to the left and
                !                      !!                     !
            m                              d             m                            m                    d
           ∑ V (α)                  `∏                  ∑ dw̄i                     ∏            V (α) ` ∏ dw̄i
                                                                    (α)                                           (α)

           α =1                           i =1          α =1                      α =1                    i =1
                                                                                                      !                          !!                             !
                                                                                   d −1                     d    d −1                  d −1      d
                                                                                      ∑V                  `∏      ∑                    ∏ ∏
                (1)                (2)                         ( d −1)                          (α)                        (α)                            (α)
=± V                  `V                 ` ··· ` V                          `                                           dw̄i                           dw̄i         = 0.
                                                                                   α =1                   i =1   α =1                  α =1     i =1

This proves the claim.

Claim. lim WΓm ( P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am ) exists if m ≥ d.
             e →0


                                                                                                                                 (α)      (α)
   We use the coordinates w(α) above. Let d2d w(α) = ∏id=1 dwi dw̄i . The graph
integral can be written as

                    WΓm ( P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am )
                                                                                                !
                                                                        m                           m +1 Z L
                                                                                                                 dtα
                      Z                             Z
                =
                          Cd
                               d w 2d      (0)
                                                         Cd
                                                        ( )
                                                               m        ∏d w     2d       (α)
                                                                                                    ∏ e (4πtα )d
                                                                   α =1           α =1
                                                                      m
                                                                           (α)
                                                               w̄im α∑
                               d               (1)               (m)     w̄im+1    m                  m
                                           w̄i1                                 − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −| ∑ w(α) |2 /4tm+1
                           ∑
                                                                      =1
                                                        ···                      α =1       e       α =1                                Φi1 ···im+1
                      i1 ,··· ,im =1
                                               t1                  tm           t m +1
                                                                                                                          m
where Φi1 ···im+1 ’s are compactly supported functions on Cd                                                                   . Using integration by
                                                                    w̄(α)
parts (or Wick’s theorem), the tα factor becomes holomorphic derivative acting on Φ
whose coefficients are uniformly bounded for tα ’s (see [Li11]). For example,
                                                                   
                           w̄
                              (1)          m      t α ∂ w(α)
                Φi1 ···im+1 1 → ∂w(1) − ∑
                              i                          i1
                                                                     Φi1 ···im+1 .
                            4t1     i1       t
                                         α =1 1
                                                + ·  · · +   t m +1


Therefore to prove the existence of limit e → 0, we only need to prove the convergence
of the integral
                                !                    m                  m
                      m           m +1 Z L        − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −| ∑ w(α) |2 /4tm+1
                                            dtα
           Z
                   m ∏d w
             ( Cd ) α =1
                         2d (α)
                                  ∏ 0 (4πtα )d e   α = 1              α =1              .
                                  α =1
                            QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                                      75


Performing the Gaussian integral on w(α) ’s, we find (up to a constant)
               m +1 Z L
                                dtα                    1
                ∏ 0 (4πtα )d                                 m +1
                                                                         d
                α =1
                                           t1−1 · · · t− 1
                                                       m +1    ∑ tα
                                                              α =1
               m +1 Z L                                m +1 Z L
                                   dtα                                                   1
            =∏                              d ≤ C ∏                    dtα                             <∞
                                                                              (t1 · · · tm+1 )d/(m+1)
                            
                α =1    0         m +1                  α =1      0
                                4π ∑ tα
                                   α =1

since d/(m + 1) < 1. This proves the claim.

  The lemma follows from the above two claims.                                                                             


7.2.2. Quantum master equation and anomaly cancellation. The vanishing of the counter
terms implies that we can define the naive quantization for ( g, h, n) = (0, 2, 0) by
                                                                         
             I0,2,0 [ L] = lim ∑ WΓ P(e, L)C + P(e, L)O , I0,1,0 + I0,1,1
                                e →0
                                       Γ:annulus


  Let
                                                                      1
    O[ L] = QI0,2,0 [ L] + { I0,1,0 [ L], I0,2,0 [ L]}O
                                                      L +               { I0,1,1 [ L], I0,1,1 [ L]}CL + ∆O,∞
                                                                                                         L I0,1,0 [ L ].
                                                                      2
By [Cos11], O[ L] satisfies a version of classical renormalization group flow equation,
and
                                                   O = lim O[ L]
                                                           L →0

exists as a local functional. This is the annulus anomaly for the quantum master equa-
tion at ( g, h, n) = (0, 2, 0). The main result in this section is the following

7.2.2 Theorem. Under a suitable rescaling of I0,1,1 by a nonzero constant, the annulus anom-
aly O vanishes.

  If follows that O[ L] = 0 and the quantum master equation at I0,2,0 [ L] holds.

7.2.3 Lemma. lim { I0,1,0 [ L], I0,2,0 [ L]}O
                                            L =0
                 L →0


Proof. This follows from Lemma 7.2.1 that lim I0,2,0 [ L] = 0.                                                             
                                                              L →0
76                                           KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


     We will let
                          1
             Oc [ L ] =     { I0,1,1 [ L], I0,1,1 [ L]}CL ,        Oo [ L] = QI0,2,0 [ L] + ∆O,∞
                                                                                             L I0,1,0 [ L ]
                          2
7.2.4 Lemma. Oc = lim Oc [ L] exists, and is given by
                            L =0
                                                         1
                                              Oc =         { I0,1,1 , I0,1,1 }C
                                                         2
Explicitly, we have
                                                              Z
Oc ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Ak ; Bk+1 , · · · , Bd ) = ±C1                  ( A0 ∧ ∂A1 ∧ · · · ∂Ak ) ∧ (∂Bk+1 ∧ · · · ∧ ∂Bd )
                                                                  Cd
                                             ∗
for two cyclic tensors { Ai }, { Bj } of Ω0,
                                          c (C ). Here C1 is a nonzero constant which only
                                               d

depends on the dimension d.

Proof. The closed string BV bracket {−, −}C is represented by the kernel of the op-
erator ∂ : PV( X ) → PV( X ), which is (∂ ⊗ 1)δDiag where δDiag is the δ-current on the
diagonal of X × X, viewed as a polyvector field via the isomorphism between forms
and polyvector fields. In particular, it only involves the component t0 PV( X ) of the
full closed string fields PV( X )[[t]]. For µ ∈ PV( X ),
                                             Z
                      I0,1,1 (µ, A) = c              Tr( A ∧ ∂A ∧ · · · ∧ ∂A) ∧ (µ ` Ω X ).
                                                 X

It follows that { I0,1,1 , I0,1,1 }C represents the functional
                                Z
                     A→c                Tr( A ∧ ∂A ∧ · · · ∧ ∂A) ∧ Tr(∂A ∧ · · · ∧ ∂A).
                                    X


     The lemma follows immediately.                                                                                  

     We are left to analyze the local functional Oo = lim Oo,[ L] . Using the relation [ Q, P(e, L)O ] =
                                                                            L →0
KeO − KO
       L , we find that Oo [ L ] is given by the following two types of Feynman diagrams




                                                                            O   O
                                                                           K KL
                                                                           ε
                           QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                            77


  The second graph vanishes under L → 0. The nontrivial contribution to the local
obstruction comes from the following wheel diagram with m + 1 vertices (m ≥ d by
degree reasons. See the proof of Lemma 7.2.1).
            A0                                Am




  A1                                                             Am-1




                 A2

  We put KeO on one edge and P(e, L)O on the other edges, and consider the following
graph integral
                                                                                   !
                                              Z                     m                         m
  WΓm (KeO , P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am ) =
                                                  ( C d ) m +1
                                                                   ∏ Aα ∧ d z
                                                                           d (α)        O
                                                                                       Ke,0,m ∏ P(e, L)Oα−1,α
                                                                   α =0                      α =1

                                                                            O
where we have kept the same notations as in the proof of Lemma 7.2.1, and Ke,0,m
denotes the corresponding BV kernel connecting the vertices z(0) and z(m) .

7.2.5 Lemma. Let Φ be a smooth function on (Cd )m with compact support, where m > d.
Let W (e, L) be the integral
                                                         !                          !
                                     m Z                      m Z L
                            1                                               dt
                        (4πe)d α∏                            ∏
                                                d2d z(α)                               Φ
                                                                               α
             W (e, L) =                                                           d
                                            C                α=1 e (4πtα )
                                              d
                                     =0
                                                 
                                 (α)      ( α −1)          m
                          m    z̄iα − z̄iα            − ∑ |z(α) −z(α−1) |2 /4tα −|z(m) −z(0) |2 /4e
                        ∏    
                                     4t α
                                                    e =1α

                        α =1


where 1 ≤ i1 , · · · , im ≤ n. Then W (0, L) ≡ lim W (e, L) exists, and
                                                          e →0

                                            lim W (0, L) = 0.
                                            L →0
78                                           KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


Proof. We consider the change of variables

                       w(0) = z(0) , w(α) = z(α+1) − z(α) , 1 ≤ α ≤ m.

Then
                                                                                                                       
                       m
                                                   !
                                                              m
                                                                                      !
                                                                                                       m          (α)                 m
             1
                           Z                                      Z L
                                                                           dtα                                 w̄iα            − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(m) |2 /4e
W (e, L) =            ∏             2d
                                   d w       (α)
                                                              ∏                             Φ ∏                        e           α =1                                  .
           (4πe)d     α =0 C
                             d
                                                              α =1 e     (4πtα )d                    α =1
                                                                                                                4tα

We define the holomorphic derivative
                                                                        m
                                                                        ∑ t ( β ) ∂ w( β)
                                                                       β =1           iβ
                                   ∂ ∗ (α) ≡ ∂ w(α) −                                           .
                                    wi α                 iα       e + t1 + · · · + t m
Then integration parts gives
                                                   !                                  !                                    !          m
                       m                                      m   Z L                            m                                 − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(m) |2 /4e
             1                                                             dtα
                           Z
W (e, L) =
           (4πe)d     ∏             2d
                                   d w       (α)
                                                              ∏          (4πtα )d               ∏         ∂ ∗ ( α )i α Φ
                                                                                                            w
                                                                                                                               e     α =1

                      α =0 C
                             d
                                                              α =1 e                            α =1


                                    m
     Since the dependence of ∏ ∂∗ (α)i Φ on tα is uniformly bounded, we have
                                   α =1 w
                                                     α

                                                         !                                  !          m
                           m                                      m    Z L                          − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(m) |2 /4e
               C                                                                dtα
                               Z
|W (e, L)| ≤
             (4πe)d        ∏         d w   2d   (α)
                                                                  ∏           (4πtα )d
                                                                                                e     α =1

                        α =1 C
                               d
                                                                α =1 e

where C is a constant which depends only on Φ. Performing the Gaussian integral on
w(α) ’s, we find
                                                    !
                                     m Z L
                                C            dtα              1
                 |W (e, L)| ≤      d ∏
                              (4πe) α=1 e (4πtα ) d   
                                                        e+t1 +···+tm
                                                                     d
                                                                                                     et1 ·tm

                                                                      dt1 · · · dtm
                                        Z
                               =C                                                                     d
                                            [e,L]m   (4π )d (e + t            1 + · · · + tm )
                                                                dt1 · · · dtm
                                        Z
                               ≤C
                                            [e,L]m (4π )n ( t1 · · · tm )d/m

It follows immediately that W (0, L) exists and

                                                   lim W (0, L) = 0
                                                   L →0

                                                                                                                                                    
                          QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                                 79


7.2.6 Corollary. If m > d, then

                         lim lim WΓm (KeO , P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am ) = 0
                         L →0 e →0


  This implies that the local functional Oo has precisely d + 1 inputs. Now we com-
pute the case for m = d.

7.2.7 Lemma. When m = d, we have
                                                                      Z
             lim WΓm (KeO , P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Am ) = C                   A0 ∧ ∂A1 ∧ · · · ∧ ∂Ad
             e →0                                                         Cd
where C is a non-zero constant which only depends on d. In particular, it doesn’t depend on L
and survives in the L → 0 limit.

Proof. Recall that
                                                                                     !
                                              Z                 d                               d
  WΓm (KeO , P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Ad ) =
                                                  (Cd ) d +1
                                                               ∏ A α ∧ dd z ( α )         O
                                                                                         Ke,0,d ∏ P(e, L)Oα−1,α .
                                                               α =0                            α =1

Again, we change variables

                          w(0) = z(0) , w(α) = z(α+1) − z(α) , 1 ≤ α ≤ d.

Then it is easy to see that
       d                                     d    Z L
                                       1                dtα
       ∏ P(e, L)Oα−1,α = ±           (4πe)d α∏
 O
Ke,0,d
      α =1                                   =1  e (4πtα )d
                                                             
                                                     d w̄(α)
                                                                  d
                                   n                            − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(d) |2 /4e d
                                  ∑ ei1 ,··· ,id  ∏ 4tα  e α=1                                          ∏ dd w̄i
                                                          i α                                                    (α)

                             i ,··· ,i =1
                             1        d            α =1                                                  i,α=1

where ei1 ,··· ,in is the totally anti-symmetric tensor. In particular, it is a top anti-holomorphic
form in w1 , · · · , wn , and we can replace the form index in Aα to w0
                                                   I                       I
                        Aα ≡ Aα (zα , z̄α ) I dz̄(α) → Aα (zα , z̄α ) I dw̄(0) .

WΓm (KeO , P(e, L)O , A0 , · · · , Ad ) can be written in the form (simply denoted by W (e, L))
                                                         !                         !
                                        m Z                    m Z L
                             1                                             dt
                        (4πe)d α∏                            ∏
                                                d2d w(α)                              Φ
                                                                              α
            W (e, L) =                                                           d
                                            C                α=1 e (4πtα )
                                              d
                                        =0
                                                       
                                              d w̄(α)
                                                              d
                                                           − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(d) |2 /4e
                           ∑ ei1 ,··· ,id  ∏ 4tα  e α=1
                                                    i α

                        i ,··· ,i
                         1       d          α =1
80                                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI

                                                                                                                  d +1
where Φ is a compactly supported smooth function on Cd                                                                      arising from Aα ’s. Let
us introduce the matrix Mαβ
                 d                                            d
                ∑ Mαβ w(α) · w̄(β) = ∑ |w(α) |2 /tα + |w(1) + · · · + w(n) |2 /e
               αβ=1                                       α =1
                         n       (α)         ( β)
where w(α) · w̄( β) = ∑ wi w̄i . M depends on tα and e. We still denote the holomor-
                       i =1
phic derivative
                                         d                                                              d
                                          −1
                                       ∑ Mαβ ∂ w( β)                                                    ∑ t ( β ) ∂ w( β)
                                     β =1                         iβ                                   β =1           iβ
                      ∂ ∗ (α) ≡                                            = ∂ w(α) −                                         .
                       wi α                         tα                                  iα       e + t1 + · · · + t d
where M−1 is the inverse matrix of M. Then integration by parts gives
                                              !                 !
                            m Z                  m Z L
                     1                                  dt
                   (4πe)d α∏
                                     d2d w(α)   ∏
                                                           α
       W (e, L) =                                             d
                                 C              α=1 e (4πtα )
                                   d
                            =0
                                              !   d
                                                          d                                  − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(n) |2 /4e
                         ∑ ei ,··· ,i1          d        ∏ ∂∗w( ) Φ         α
                                                                           iα
                                                                                         e     α =1                                      .
                       i1 ,··· ,id                       α =1


     To compute the e → 0 limit, we introduce a cut-off function
                                                     !
                                                                                 n
                                                     χδ = ρ                     ∑ | w ( α ) |2
                                                                                α =1

where ρ( x ) is a smooth non-negative function for x ≥ 0 such that

                          ρ( x ) = 1, if 0 ≤ x ≤ δ,                                      ρ( x ) = 0, if x ≥ 2δ

where δ is a small enough positive number. It is easy to see that
                                                         !                   !
                                         d Z                  d Z L
                                  1                                  dtα
    lim lim W (e, L) = lim lim
                       L→0 e→0 (4πe )d
                                       ∏ dd w     2d (α)
                                                             ∏             d
                                                                               χδ
                                       α =0 C                α=1 e (4πtα )
    L →0 e →0
                                                !     d
                                                                       d                             − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(d) |2 /4e
                                     ∑       ei1 ,··· ,id          ∏ ∂ ∗ (α) Φ   wi α
                                                                                                 e     α =1                                      .
                               i1 ,··· ,id                         α =1

This expression allows us to use Wick’s theorem to approximate the e → 0 limit. The
leading term is
                                     !              !
                    d Z                  d Z L
            1                                  dt
          (4πe)d α∏                    ∏ e (4πtα )d
                            d2d w(α)
                                                  α

                    =0  C d
                                       α =1
                                              QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                                                                        81

                                                                            !                                         d
                                                      d                                                         − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(d) |2 /4e
                ∑ ei ,··· ,i    1        d          ∏      ∂ ∗ (α) Φ
                                                             wi α
                                                                                                            e        α =1

              i1 ,··· ,id                          α =1                            w1 =···=wd =0
                                                                                                                              !                               −1   !
              1
                                Z                                                                   d                                                        Mαβ
          =
            (4πe)d                  Cd
                                         d w  2d       (0)
                                                                ∑ ei ,··· ,i   1          d     ∏ ∂ w( ) Φ       α
                                                                                                                iα
                                                                                                                                                     det
                                                                                                                                                              tα
                                                              i1 ,··· ,id                      α =1                                  w1 =···=wd =0
                                                          !                                             !                 d
                    d       Z                                        d      Z L
                                                                                      dtα                       − ∑ Mαβ w(α) ·w̄( β) /4
                   ∏                d w  2d       (α)
                                                                  ∏                 (4πtα )d
                                                                                                            e        αβ=1

                   α =1 C
                          d
                                                                  α =1 e
                                              n
                                     e+ ∑ tα
                                             α =1
Using det( Mαβ ) =                           n          , we can integrate out w1 , · · · , wn and get
                                         e ∏ tα
                                          α =1
                                                                                                !
                                                                               d
   1                                                                                                                                                   edt1 · · · dtd
          Z                                                                                                                            Z

 (4π )d       Cd
                   d2d w(0)              ∑            ei1 ,··· ,id          ∏ ∂ w(α) Φ    iα                                               [e,L]d ( e + t1 + · · · + td )d+1
                                     i1 ,··· ,id                            α =1                        w1 =···=wd =0

We integrate over tα ’s. Under the limit e → 0, it is proportional to
                                                         !
                  Z                                                                                     n

                                     Cd
                                              d2d w(0)               ∑         ei1 ,··· ,in         ∏ ∂ w( ) Φ        α
                                                                                                                     iα
                                                                 i1 ,··· ,in                        α =1                              w1 =···=wn =0

If we get back Aα ’s, we find
                                                  Z
                                             C             A0 (y, ȳ) ∧ ∂A1 (y, ȳ) ∧ · · · ∧ ∂Ad (y, ȳ)
                                                      Cd

where C is a non-zero constant which only depends on d.

  Now we consider higher order terms. It is of the following form
                                        !                  !       d
                        d Z                 d Z L              − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(d) |2 /4e
             1                                        dt
           (4πe)d α∏
                                 2d (α)
                                          ∏ e (4πtα )d e 1
                                                         α
U (e, L) =                      d w                              α =

                       =0   C d
                                          α =1
                                                                 !
                              N                      d
            ∑ ei1 ,··· ,id ∏ Mα−k1βk ∂¯ (αk ) ∂ (βk ) ∏ ∂∗ (α) Φ                   w̄ j        wj                             wi α
               i1 ,··· ,id                            k =1                            k         k           α =1                             w1 =···=wd =0

for some αk , β k , jk , 1 ≤ k ≤ N. Note that

                                                            −1                                        tα t β
                                                           Mαβ = tα δαβ −
                                                                                               e + t1 + · · · + t n
therefore
                                                                                      −1
                                                                                   | Mαβ | ≤ 2tα
82                                            KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


It follows that
                                                                                    !                                !
                                                    d                                           d   Z L
                              1                                                                             dtα
                                                          Z
             |U (e, L)| ≤ C
                            (4πe)d                 ∏ C d2d w(α)
                                                              d
                                                                                             ∏            (4πtα )d
                                                   α =1                                      α =1 e
                                          −1        !                       !           d
                                         Mαβ                   N                    − ∑ |w(α) |2 /4tα −|w(1) +···+w(d) |2 /4e
                               det
                                              tα              ∏ tj      k
                                                                                e     α =1

                                                              k =1
                                                                                            N
                                 Z                                                   e ∏ t jk
                                                                                        k =1
                            =C                dt1 · · · dtd
                                     [e,L]d                        ( e + t 1 + · · · + t d ) d +1
for some constant C. In particular,

                                                   lim lim U (e, L) = 0.
                                                   L →0 e →0

The lemma now follows.                                                                                                          


     Now we have all the necessary ingredients to compute the local obstruction Oo
                                                            ∗
7.2.8 Lemma. Given two cyclic tensors { Ai }, { Bj } of Ω0,
                                                         c (C ), we have
                                                              d
                                                                   Z
Oo ( A0 , A1 , · · · , Ak ; Bk+1 , · · · , Bd ) = ±C2                       ( A0 ∧ ∂A1 ∧ · · · ∂Ak ) ∧ (∂Bk+1 ∧ · · · ∧ ∂Bn )
                                                                       Cd
Here C2 is a nonzero constant which only depends on the dimension d.


Proof. The two cyclic tensors are two sides of the wheel diagram

       A0                                          Ak




                   Bk+1         Bd




            A1
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                          83


  The lemma follows from Corollary 7.2.6 and Lemma 7.2.7.                                 

  Therefore the total anomaly is

                                            O = Oc + Oo .

Oc and Oo differ by the term
                                   Z
                             A→             Tr( A ∧ (∂A)d ) ∧ Tr(1).
                                       Cd
If we work with the quantum theory modulo N, then Oc and Oo are equal up to a
nonzero constant. Recall the classical master equation
                                         1
                               QI0,1,0 + { I0,1,0 , I0,1,0 }O = 0
                                         2
                               QI0,1,1 + { I0,1,0 , I0,1,1 }O = 0.

There is a rescaling symmetry preserving the master equation

                                 I0,1,1 → λI0,1,1 ,      λ ∈ C∗ ,

which results in the rescaling of the anomaly

                                        O → λ 2 Oc + Oo .

Therefore under a suitable rescaling of I0,1,1 by a nonzero constant, O = 0. This rescal-
ing constant is uniquely fixed (up to ±) by the annulus anomaly cancellation condi-
tion. Theorem 7.2.2 is proved.


                          8. C LASSICAL BCOV INTERACTION

   The quantum open-closed BCOV theory we constructed in this paper in particular
includes a classical BCOV interaction, defined by

                                    I0,0,n = lim I0,0,n [ L].
                                                L →0

The fact that I0,0,n [ L] satisfies the purely closed string classical RG flow and equation
implies that this limit exists and is a local functional. We let

                                  I0,0,∗ (α) = ∑ I0,0,n (α).
                                                  n ≥3

The master equation for I0,0,n [ L] implies that I0,0,∗ satisfies the classical master equa-
tion.
84                                     KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   In [CL12] we described a classical interaction for BCOV theory on any Calabi-Yau X.
Let us call this classical interaction J. It is defined as follows. If α ∈ PV∗c ,∗ (Cd )[[t]][2],
let αk denote the coefficient of tk . Then, we set
                                                                            Z
                     Jn (α) =              ∑                  ck1 ,...,kn       αk1 ∧ · · · ∧ αk n
                                k1 ,...,k n with ∑ k i =n−3

where the combinatorial constant ck1 ,...,kn can be defined by
                                                       Z
                                   ck1 ,...,kn = n!1              ψ1k1 . . . ψnkn .
                                                           M0,n

We then define the interaction J by saying that

                                            J (α) = ∑ Jn (α).
                                                       n ≥3

One can check [CL12] that J (α) satisfies the classical master equation. In particular, it
defines a L∞ structure

                             ln : (PV(Cd )[[t]])⊗n → PV(Cd )[[t]]

where Q + { J, −}C is the corresponding Chevalley-Eilenberg differential. Such de-
fined L∞ -structure is L∞ -equivalent to the standard dg Lie algebra structure on PV(Cd )[[t]]
via the nonlinear transformation

                     PV(Cd )[[d]] → PV(Cd )[[t]],                    µ → π+ (teµ/t − t).

Here π+ : PV(Cd )((t)) → PV(Cd )[[t]] is the projection by picking up the non-negative
powers of t.

     In the introduction we made the following conjecture.

Conjecture. The functionals J and I0,0,∗ are equivalent solutions to the classical master equa-
tion.

     Let us now prove the result we stated in the introduction:

8.0.9 Proposition. This conjecture implies the holomorphic analog of Willwacher-Calaque’s
refinement of Kontsevich’s formality theorem.


Sketch of proof of the proposition. The functionals I and J each define an L∞ -structure on
the space PV(Cd )[[t]][1], with the feature that a solution to the equations of motion
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                         85


is a Maurer-Cartan element in this L∞ algebra structure. For both I and J, the L∞
structures are local, meaning that the maps

                             ln : (PV(Cd )[[t]])⊗n → PV(Cd )[[t]]

are multi-differential operators.

  Further, the operations I0,1,n [ L] satisfy a classical renormalization group equation,
and so have an L → 0 limit which is a local functional which we call I0,1,n . Let us
further refine this functional, and let I0,(1|k),n denote the component coming from discs
with k marked points on the boundary and n on the interior.

  The local functional I0,(1|k),n defines a multi-differential operator

                                         ⊗n
                        PV(Cd )[[t]][2]         × Ω0,∗ (Cd )⊗k−1 → Ω0,∗ (Cd )


   The L∞ structure associated to J, hence I, is equivalent to the standard one, with the
only non-zero higher bracket ln being l2 which is the Schouten bracket. The content
of the proposition is the statement that the L∞ structure associated to I is equivalent
to the L∞ structure on cyclic cochains, which is in fact realized by the L∞ -morphism
I0,1,n .

                                                                                           


  Next, we will prove the following lemma, stated in the introduction.

8.0.10 Lemma. I0,0,3 and J3 define equivalent solutions of the classical master equation mod-
ulo quartic terms.


Proof. I0,0,3 is holomorphically translation invariant, SU (d) invariant, and of weight
2d under the action of the S1 which scales Cd . We will use these facts to constrain the
form of I0,0,3 .

   The classical master equation modulo quartic terms simply says that I0,0,3 is a closed
element of the complex of local functionals, equipped with the differential coming
from the linear differential on the fields of BCOV theory.
86                                             KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   The arguments we used earlier allow us to express the relevant cohomology group
in terms of jets of holomorphic polyvector fields. We have
                                         J0 (PV[[t]][2]) = C[[zi , ∂i , t]][2]
where the variables ∂i have degree 1 and t has degree 2. The differential is as usual t∂.
Let D0 = C[ ∂z∂ i ] be the algebra of constant-coefficient differential operators. Then, the
dual to jets of polyvector fields is
                                      J0 (PV[[t]][2])∨ = D0 [αi , t−1 ][−2]
where the variables αi are dual to ∂i and have degree −1, and t−1 has degree −2.
The differential on the dual is the operator ∑i αi ∂z∂ i t. Under the action of U (d), the αi
transform as covectors dzi , so that the algebra generated by the αi is that of constant-
coefficient differential forms.

     The complex where possible interactions I0,0,3 live is
                                     Ω0d,0 ⊗L     3                ∨
                                            D0 Sym ( J0 (PV[[ t ]]) )[− d ]

where the cohomological shift is so that I0,0,3 is of degree zero. Here Ω0d,0 refers to the
fibre at 0 of the bundle of (d, 0) forms.

   Let us ignore, for now, the internal differential on J0 (PV[[t]]). Note that Sym3 ( J0 (PV[[t]])∨ )
is flat as a D0 module. So we can take the actual tensor product instead of the derived
one. Let us also, for now, investigate the tensor cube rather than the symmetric cube,
and we will take symmetric invariants at the end.

     We find, after these considerations, that we are looking at
                                 ⊗3                                                ⊗2
       Ω0d,0 ⊗ D0 D0 [αi , t−1 ]      [−d] = Ω0d,0 ⊗C C[αi , t−1 ] ⊗C D0 [αi , t−1 ]      [−d].

Now, the αi have weight +1 under the action of S1 ⊂ U (d), and we are interested in
something of total weight 2d. Since the dz1 . . . dzd ∈ Ω0d,0 has weight d and elements in
D0 all have non-positive weights, this means we must have at least d αi ’s. Now, if we
have more than d αi ’s, then we are pushed into negative cohomological degree. It fol-
lows that we must have precisely d αi ’s. Further, cohomological degree consideration
tells us that the only powers of t−1 that appear is t0 = 1.

     Next, SU (d) invariance tells us that the only possibilities are of the form
                    µc1 ,c2 ,c3 =                 ∑                     ±dz1 . . . dzd α I1 ⊗ α I2 ⊗ α I3 .
                                    | I1 |=c1 , | I2 |=c2 , | I3 |=c3
                          QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                    87


Here { I1 , I2 , I3 } is a partition of {1, . . . , d} and α I means ∏i∈ I αi .

   As a functional on PVc (Cd )[[t]], µc1 ,c2 ,c3 sends a field

                                          α = ∑ tk αk = ∑ tk αlk

where αlk ∈ PVl,∗ (Cd ) to
                            Z
                                (α0c1 α0c2 α0c3 ` Ω) ∧ Ω,       Ω = dz1 · · · dzd .

Let us call this functional ρc1 ,c2 ,c3 . Our action functional I0,0,3 must be a sum

                                      I0,0,3 =     ∑ Ac ,c ,c ρc ,c ,c
                                                              1 2 3   1 2 3
                                                 c1 ,c2 ,c3

for some constants Ac1 ,c2 ,c3 . It remains to show that these constants are all 1.

  To check this, note that I0,0,3 defines a bracket on PV(C3 ) with the feature that the
Maurer-Cartan equation for this bracket is the equations of motion. Let us call this
{−, −} I0,0,3 . Explicitly, this bracket is of the form

                                {α, β} I0,0,3 = ∑ Ac1 ,c2 ,d−c1 −c2 {αc1 , βc2 }

where αc1 is the component in PVc1 ,∗ and similarly for βc2 , and {−, −} is the Schouten
bracket.

   Now, at the cohomological level, the argument in the proof of proposition 8.0.10
tells us that this must be Lie bracket on the cyclic cohomology of Ω0,∗ (C3 ). The
Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg theorem then tells us that the bracket {−, −} I0,0,3 must
be (at the cohomological level) the usual Schouten bracket, and this fixes all the con-
stants Ac1 ,c2 ,c3 .                                                                 


                                        9. (1, 0) BCOV THEORY

  In the introduction we described a variant of BCOV theory which we call (1, 0)
BCOV theory. Let us recall the definition and explain how the techniques we have
developed so far allow us to quantize this theory on a variety of Calabi-Yau 3-folds.

   The fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory on a Calabi-Yau 3-fold X form the complex

                                       Ω0,∗ ( X, TX )[1] ⊕ Ω0,∗ ( X )
88                                 KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


with differential ∂ + t∂, where

                                ∂ : Ω0,∗ ( X, TX ) → Ω0,∗ ( X )

is the holomorphic divergence map. We can view this complex of fields as the sub-
space
                       PV1,∗ ( X )[1] ⊕ t PV0,∗ ( X ) ⊂ PV∗,∗ ( X )[[t]][2]
of the fields of BCOV theory.

  This theory is a degenerate theory in the BV formalism, just like ordinary BCOV
theory. Therefore, instead of writing down a quadratic interaction we will write down
a kernel describing the BV anti-bracket. This, together with the differential in the
complex of fields, allows us to construct such things as the propagator and to quantize
the theory.

   In ordinary BCOV theory on a CY 3-fold X, the kernel for the BV bracket is (∂ ⊗
1)δDiag where δDiag is the δ-current on the diagonal of X × X, viewed as a polyvector
field via the isomorphism between forms and polyvector fields. This kernel π is a sum
of the form
                                  π=                 ∑             π(i,j),(k,l )
                                               j + l =3 i + k =2

where
                                                i,j
                                                      b PV k,l ( X ).
                              π(i,j),(k,l ) ∈ PV ( X )⊗
To get the kernel for the (1, 0) BCOV theory, we simply take the components of this
kernel which are of type (1, j) × (1, l ) where j + l = 3.

   In a similar way, the closed string propagator P(e, L)C and regularized BV kernel
4CL are the projections of those for the full BCOV theory onto polyvector fields of type
(1, ∗).

   This theory couples to holomorphic Chern-Simons for the group sl( N | N ) via an
interaction we call I0,1,1 , as before. This interaction is simply the restriction of the in-
teraction between the fields of the full BCOV theory with holomorphic Chern-Simons
to those fields which are in the subspace consisting of the fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory.
One can check, from our earlier formula for I0,1,1 , that if µ ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X, TX ), φ ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X ),
and A ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ sl( N | N )
                                       Z
             I0,1,1 (φ + µ + A) = 21           Tr( A∂A) ∧ (µ ` Ω) + 13 Tr( A3 ) ∧ φΩ.
                                           X
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                            89


In other words, we have the holomorphic Chern-Simons action for the complex struc-
ture deformed by µ with volume form scaled by φ.

   We can define, exactly as before, the notion of quantization of the theory coupling
(1, 0) BCOV theory to sl( N | N ) holomorphic Chern-Simons, in a way compatible
with the inclusion maps sl( N | N ) ,→ sl( N + k | N + k ). Let us refer to this simply as
open-closed (1, 0) BCOV theory.

  Let us now explain the analogs of our theorems A and B from earlier, concerning
cohomological cancellation for quantization beyond the annulus level and the annulus
anomaly cancellation.

   Let X be a conical Calabi-Yau, meaning that there is a C× action on X which scales
the holomorphic volume form by some positive weight w. As before, let T <(G,R) ( X )
and T ≤(G,R) ( X ) refer to the simplicial sets for quantizing the theory up to level ( G, R),
in a way compatible with the C× action on the conical Calabi-Yau.

9.0.11 Theorem.         (1) For any Calabi-Yau 3-fold X, if R > 1 then the map T ≤(G,R) ( X ) →
        T <(G,R) ( X ) is a weak equivalence of simplicial sets.
    (2) Let X be a conical Calabi-Yau manifold. Further, let us assume that H∂0 ( X, OX ) and
        H∂1 ( X, OX ) are spanned by elements of non-negative weight under the C× action.
        (This happens, for instance, if X is the total space of the canonical bundle over a com-
        plex surface where the C× action scales the fibres of the canonical bundle).
           Then if 2G − 2 + R > 0 the map

                                  T ≤(G,R) ( X ) → T <(G,R)

        is a weak equivalence of simplicial sets.
    (3) If we consider holomorphically translation invariant theories on C3 , then if 2G − 2 +
        R > 0 the map

                               T ≤(G,R) (C3 ) → T <(G,R) ( X )

        is a weak equivalence. The same result holds when we consider theories on Y × Cd
        where Y is a Calabi-Yau (3 − d)-fold and we ask for quantizations which are holomor-
        phically translation invariant in the Cd factor.

9.0.12 Theorem. For any Calabi-Yau manifold X, there is a unique quantization of open-
closed (1, 0) BCOV theory to the annulus level.
90                                 KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


9.0.13 Corollary. For any conical Calabi-Yau manifold satisfying the conditions stated above,
there is a unique quantization of (1, 0) open-closed BCOV theory. In particular, this leads
to a quantization of (1, 0) BCOV theory. The same holds for holomorphically translation
invariant on C3 or theories on Y × Cd which are holomorphically translation invariant in the
Cd direction.

9.0.14 Corollary. There is a unique quantization of open-closed (1, 0) BCOV theory on any
Calabi-Yau X at genus 0, i.e. in the planar limit.


Proof of 9.0.11. The proof is very much along the lines of the proof of theorem 6.0.10. In
particular, the obstruction-deformation complex can be expressed in terms of certain
D-modules. The D-module of jets of closed-string fields in this case is the jets of the
complex of fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory. This complex is equivalent to the complex

                            Ω2,∗ ( X )[1] −
                                          → Ω3,∗ = F2 Ω∗,∗ ( X )[3],
                                          ∂


which is the cochain level version of F2 in the Hodge filtration. The differential is ∂ + ∂.
Locally, the cohomology of this complex consists of closed holomorphic 2-forms on X.
Thus, from the closed string sector jets of fields are JF2 Ω∗,∗ ( X )[3] and functionals on
the jets of fields are
                                    Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( JF2 Ω∗,∗ [3])
where O refers to functionals modulo constants, and we are tensoring over all differ-
ential operators (not just holomorphic ones).

   For the open string sector, we can use the argument from before to express possi-
ble admissible local functionals in terms of functions on the cyclic homology of jets of
Ω0,∗ ( X ) (shifted by [1]). The cyclic homology of JΩ0,∗ ( X ) is the complex JΩ−∗,∗ ( X )[t−1 ]
with differential t∂. There is a direct summand in this consisting of JΩ0,∗ ( X ), and this
corresponds to the part of the Lie algebra homology of JΩ0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ gl( N | N ) which
comes from the Abelian sub-algebra consisting of JΩ0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ Id. It follows that the
variant of cyclic homology we need to take which describes sl( N | N ) Lie algebra ho-
mology is simply the complement of this summand. Let us call this sl-cyclic homology.
We find that

           HCsl ( JΩ0,∗ ( X ))[1] = ⊕i≥1 JΩi,∗ ( X )[i + 1] ⊕ t−1 JΩ−∗,∗ ( X )[t−1 ][1].

  As in the proof of theorem 6.0.10 the possible local functionals that can arise in the
open-closed theory are described as functionals on a complex which is a direct sum
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                          91


of this cyclic homology complex together with the jets of closed string fields, with a
differential connecting them coming from the disk with one interior marked point. In
sum, we find that the jet complex is described by the double complex which is the sum
of the rows in the following table

   Sector           closed          closed        open                  open             open                  ···


   Degree              0             −1               −2                  −3              −4                   ···


                                                                 t∂
                     JΩ3,∗ o        JΩ2,∗ o       JΩ1,∗ o
                                ∂             ∂
Jet complex                                                           t−1 JΩ0,∗


                                                                                  t∂                 t∂
                                                                        JΩ2,∗ o        t−1 JΩ1,∗ o             ···


                                                                                                     t∂
                                                                                         JΩ3,∗ o               ···


                                                                                                               ···
We have included here the map from the connecting differential from the closed string
sector to the open string sector on the third row.

  We see that all the rows of this complex are simply the de Rham complex with a
shift, with the exception of that in the fourth row, which does not include Ω3,∗ .

  If M denotes the complex of D-module appearing in this diagram, then our obstruction-
deformation complex is Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( M) where O indicates functions modulo constants
and D is the algebra of C ∞ differential operators.

  Since jets of the de Rham complex is quasi-isomorphic to just the trivial D-module
 ∞ (i.e. the sheaf of smooth functions with its trivial flat connection) we find that there
CX
is a quasi-isomorphism

                               M ≃ JΩ≤2,∗ [5]         ⊕i=3,7,9... CX∞ [i ].
                                                  M



  Introduce variables e3 , e7 , e9 . . . where ei is of degree i. Then, we find that
92                                    KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI

                                 n                                               o
     Ω3,3 ⊗L
           D O ( M) = Ω
                        3,3
                            ⊗D        Sym>0 ( JΩ≤2,∗ )∨ [−5] [e3 , e7 , e9 . . . ]

                                                       ⊕ Ω3,3 ⊗L  ∞
                                                               D CX ⊗C (C[ e3 , e7 , e9 . . . ] /C).

We can compute the relevant tensor products over D. First we have
                                            ∞
                                  Ω3,3 ⊗ D
                                         L
                                           CX ≃ Ω∗,∗ ( X )[6].

We also have
                            Ω3,3 ⊗ D ( JΩ≤2,∗ )∨ ≃ Ω≥1,∗ ( X )[6].
After all, the complex on the left hand side is a way of writing linear local functionals
of Ω≤2,∗ ( X ), and of course every local functional is given by integrating against an
element of Ω≥1,∗ ( X ).

  Note that the cohomology of the truncated de Rham complex Ω≥1,∗ ( X )[1] is the
cohomology of X with coefficients in the sheaf of closed holomorphic 1-forms, so we
will refer to it as H ∗ ( X, Ω1cl,hol ). Therefore

                      H ∗ (Ω3,3 ⊗ D ( JΩ≤2,∗ )∨ [−5]) = H ∗ ( X, Ω1cl,hol ).


     For the cohomology of Ω3,3 ⊗ D Symk JΩ≤2,∗ )∨ [−5] , we need a lemma.
                                                       

9.0.15 Lemma. If k > 1 then
                                                           
                           H i Ω3,3 ⊗ D Symk JΩ≤2,∗ )∨ [−5]

is zero if i < 2.


Proof. There is a short exact sequence of D-modules

                        0 → JΩ3,∗ [2] → JΩ∗,∗ [5] → JΩ≤2,∗ [5] → 0.

Applying this short exact sequence yields a spectral sequences converging to the co-
homology groups we are computing whose first term involves replacing JΩ≤2,∗ [5] by
JΩ∗,∗ [5] ⊕ JΩ3,∗ [3]. As above, the cohomology of jets of the de Rham complex is just
the trivial D-module CX   ∞ , but now situated in degree −5. The cohomology sheaves of

the dual of JΩ3,∗ [3] is the D-module Dhol of smooth sections of the bundle of holomor-
phic differential operators, situated in degree 3.

  The functor which sends a D-module M to Ω3,3 ⊗L     D M can be modelled by the de
Rham complex of X with coefficients in M [6]. So if M is in degree k this functor yields
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                   93


something concentrated in degrees between k and k − 6. If k > 7 then we find nothing
in degrees ≤ 1.

   Now, the higher symmetric powers of CX       ∞ [−5] ⊕ D [−3] has summands in degrees
                                                           hol
6, 8, . . . . Only the term in degree 6, namely ∧2 Dhol , can possibly contribute. However,
                                ⊗2                             ⊗2
∧2 Dhol is a summand of Dhol       , and the sheaf Ω3,3 ⊗ D Dhol  has cohomology in degrees
≥ −3. Since we are shifting up by 6, we find no cohomology in degrees ≤ 1.               


 Putting this together tells us that our obstruction-deformation complex has coho-
mology:

  H ∗ (Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( M )) = HdR
                            ∗
                               ( X )[6] ⊗ (C[e3 , e7 , . . . ]/C)
                                  ⊕ H ∗ ( X, Ω1cl,hol )[e3 , e7 , . . . , ]
                                                                  ⊕ things in degree 2 and higher.
Since d = 3, the relevant pieces to our computation are in degrees ≤ 1. We have

               H i (Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( M)) = H 3+i ( X )e3 if i < 0.
               H 0 (Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( M)) = H 3 ( X )e3 ⊕ H 0 ( X, Ω1cl,hol )
               H 1 (Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( M)) = H 4 ( X )e3 ⊕ H 0 ( X )e7 ⊕ H 1 ( X, Ω1cl,hol )

   Note that all of these cohomology groups are built from functionals which are in the
first symmetric power of the dual of our D-module of jets. This means they correspond
either to functionals which are linear of the closed string fields and independent of the
open string fields, or to functionals which do not depend on the closed string fields
but which are single-trace on the open string fields.

   This implies that the map T ≤( g,R) ( X ) → T <( g,R) ( X ) is a weak equivalence if R > 1,
for any X.

   Next, let us see what happens if X = C3 and we consider holomorphically transla-
tion invariant quantizations. In this case, our discussion in the proof of theorem 6.2.3
tells us that we should replace the D-module M by its fibre M at 0, which we call M0 ;
and the algebra D of differential operators by the algebra D0hol = C[ ∂z∂ i ] of constant-
coefficient holomorphic differential operators. The obstruction-deformation complex
is
                                           L
                                      Ω3,0
                                       0 ⊗ D hol O ( M0 )[3].
                                                  0
94                                    KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


The arguments described above that calculate the cohomology of the D-module M
also calculate that of the D0hol -module M0 . We find that we should replace every oc-
currence of the cohomology of X by the algebra Ω0∗,0 = C[dzi ] of holomorphic dif-
ferential forms with constant coefficients, and every occurrence of the cohomology of
X with coefficients in Ω1cl,hol by the complex Ω0≥1,0 [1] = dzi C[dzi ][1], of holomorphic
differential forms of degree 1 and higher, with grading such that i forms are in degree
i − 1.

  So we find that the obstruction-deformation complex for holomorphic translation
invariant quantizations on C3 has cohomology groups:
                               L                     3+i,0
                     H i (Ω3,0
                           0 ⊗ D hol O ( M0 )[3]) = Ω0     e3 if i < 0
                                  0
                             L
                     H (Ω3,0
                       0                                             1,0
                         0 ⊗ D0hol O ( M0 )[3]) = Cdz1 dz2 dz3 e3 ⊕ Ω0
                               L
                     H 1 (Ω3,0                             2,0
                           0 ⊗ D hol O ( M0 )[3]) = Ce7 ⊕ Ω0 .
                                  0


If we also ask for SU (3)-invariants we find
                                L
                     H −3 (Ω3,0
                            0 ⊗ D hol O ( M0 )[3])
                                                   SU (3)
                                                          = Ce3
                                      0
                               L
                       H (Ω3,0
                           0 ⊗ D0hol O ( M0 )[3])
                           i                      SU (3)
                                                         = 0 if i = −1, −2
                                 L
                       H 0 (Ω3,0
                             0 ⊗ D hol O ( M0 )[3])
                                                    SU (3)
                                                           = Cdz1 dz2 dz3 e3
                                      0
                               L
                       H (Ω3,0
                           0 ⊗ D0hol O ( M0 )[3])
                           1                      SU (3)
                                                         = Ce7 .

That is, in this case there is a single possible obstruction, a single possible deformation,
and no symmetries.

   Let’s now discuss the possible deformations and obstructions explicitly. We will do
this in the case of a general Calabi-Yau, but the same formulae apply to the holomor-
phically translation invariant situation on C3 .

     (1) A class α ∈ H 3 ( X ) gives a deformation. Let us write explicitly the corre-
         sponding Lagrangian of the theory. Choose a cochain representative of α as
         a sum of (i, j) forms αi,j . Let A ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X ) ⊗ sl( N | N ) be an open string field,
         v ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X, TX ) and φ ∈ Ω0,∗ ( X ) be the closed string fields. The deformation
         is by the Lagrangian
       Z                                 Z                  Z                Z
         α3,0 31 Tr A3 + 12 Tr A ∂A + 12 α2,1 Tr A∂A + α1,2 (v ` Ω) + α0,3 φΩ.
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                             95


         The terms coming from α3,0 and α2,1 are simply the deformation of the holo-
         morphic Chern-Simons functional when we change the complex structure and
         holomorphic volume form. In the holomorphically translation invariant case
         on C3 , α is of course of type (i, 0).
    (2) Similarly, a class α ∈ H i ( X )e3 gives an anomaly if i = 4 and a symmetry if
         i = 2. These are represented by Lagrangians of cohomological degree 1 and
         −1 respectively. If we expand, as above, a cochain representative of α in terms
         of ( p, q)-forms α p,q where p + q = i, the corresponding Lagrangian is
  Z                                     Z                    Z                  Z
       3,i −3 1                                 2,i −2            1,i −1
               3 Tr A + 2 Tr A ∂A + 2                                    (v ` Ω) + α0,i φΩ.
                      3   1             1
     α                                       α         Tr A∂A + α

       Note that if i = 2 then the first term does not appear and if i = 4 the last term
       does not appear.
   (3) A closed holomorphic (1, 0)-form β ∈ H 0 ( X, Ω1cl,hol ) gives rise to a deforma-
       tion. This is the functional
                                       Z
                                 A 7→ β Tr A(∂A)2 .
                                                      


       This functional is the variation in the holomorphic Chern-Simons functional as
       we make X non-commutative in a way coming form the holomorphic bi-vector
       whose contraction with Ω is β.
   (4) A class β ∈ H 1 ( X, Ω1cl,hol ) gives a potential anomaly. If, at the cochain level, we
       write β as a sum of β1,1 and β2,0 , then the functional is of the form
               Z                             Z                       Z
       A 7→ c1 β1,1 Tr A(∂A)2 + c2 ∂β1,1 Tr A2 ∂A + c3 β2,0 Tr( A3 ∂A).
                                                            


       This is the functional I 1−disk ( β1,1 + tβ2,0 , A) where we think of β1,1 as a polyvec-
       tor field in PV2,1 and β2,0 as in PV1,0 , and where I 1−disk indicates the interaction
       for the full BCOV theory corresponding to a disk with a single marked point
       in the interior.
   (5) The class 1e7 ∈ H 0 ( X )e7 gives a potential anomaly of the form
                                       Z
                                          Tr A(∂A)3 .
                                                         


If X is a conical Calabi-Yau, then we can analyze how these functionals scale when we
scale our fields using the C× action on X and use this analysis to complete the proof of
the theorem. We will scale polyvector fields using the natural scaling on the de Rham
complex and the isomorphism between polyvector fields and the de Rham complex. If
we do this, then we find that the functionals corresponding to classes in H ∗ ( X ) and in
96                                  KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


H ∗ ( X, Ω1cl,hol ) scale according to the natural action of C× on these cohomology groups.
Note that C× acts trivially on H ∗ ( X ) but possibly non-trivially on H ∗ ( X, Ω1cl,hol ).

   The axiom of compatibility with the scaling action tells the obstruction-deformation
group controlling lifts from T <(G,R) ( X ) to T ≤(G,R) ( X ) consists of Lagrangians of
weight (−2G + 2 − R)w, where w is the weight of the holomorphic volume form on
X under scaling. To prove our theorem, we need to show that there are no elements
in the obstruction-deformation complex of negative weight. Elements in this complex
which come from de Rham cohomology of X are of weight zero, so don’t contribute.
It suffices to show that elements coming from H ∗ ( X, Ω1cl,hol ) also don’t contribute.

     The short exact sequence
                                                  d
                                 0 → C → OX → Ω1cl,hol → 0

leads to a long exact sequence of the form

(†)               · · · → H∂i ( X, OX ) → H i ( X, Ω1cl,hol ) → HdR
                                                                 i +1
                                                                      (X) → . . .
and the maps in the exact sequence commute with the C× action on everything. Since
everything in HdR i +1
                       ( X ) is C× -invariant, any elements of H i+1 ( X, Ω1cl,hol ) which are not
C× invariant come from H∂i ( X, OX ). In the statement of our theorem, we assume that
every element of H 0 ( X, OX ) and H∂1 ( X, OX ) is of non-negative weight under the C× -
action, so that it can not contribute to the obstruction-deformation group, thus com-
pleting the proof of the theorem.

  Next, let us discuss the holomorphically translation invariant case on C3 . In this
case, once we also impose SU (3)-invariance, all possible obstructions and also higher
symmetries (coming in this case from H −3 of the obstruction-deformation complex)
are scale invariant. The one possible deformation – corresponding to the Lagrangian
  dz1 dz2 dz3 Tr A3 – has positive weight, so also can not contribute. The result follows.
R


  Finally let us discuss the case of a Calabi-Yau of the form Y × Cd , where Y is a
Calabi-Yau of dimension 3 − d. In this case we are interested in quantizations which
are holomorphically translation-invariant in the Cd directions, and also satisfying the
scaling axiom with respect to scaling of Cd . A small variant of the arguments dis-
cussed above shows that, in the obstruction-deformation complex, there is nothing of
negative weight, so again the result follows.

                                                                                               
                       QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                          97


  Now we will prove theorem 9.0.12, which we restate now for convenience.

Theorem. For any Calabi-Yau manifold X of dimension 3, there is a unique quantization of
open-closed BCOV theory to the annulus level.

Proof. The strategy is the following. We will start by examining the cohomology
groups containing potential obstructions and deformations at the annulus level. We
will find that for any Calabi-Yau, there are no possible deformations but there might
be obstructions. Next, we will see that to show the obstruction vanishes it suffices to
show it locally on X. This reduces the problem to the case of C3 , where we can apply
a variant of the annulus anomaly cancellation argument for the full BCOV theory.

   The cohomology calculation we start with is almost identical to that of proposi-
tion 7.0.1 where we analyzed the corresponding groups for gl( N | N ) holomorphic
Chern-Simons. The cohomology group we are computing is described in terms of the
sl-version of the cyclic homology of jets of functions on X. Recall that the sl cyclic
homology is
           HCsl ( JΩ0,∗ ( X ))[1] = ⊕i≥1 JΩi,∗ ( X )[i + 1] ⊕ t−1 JΩ−∗,∗ ( X )[t−1 ][1]
with a differential which is the jet of ∂ + t∂. We will denote this D-module (in the
model used on the right hand side) by M. There is a filtration on M by the powers
of t occurring, whose associated graded is the same object with differential ∂. Let us
denote the associated graded by M0 .

  The obstruction-deformation complex is global sections of the sheaf of complexes
on X
                               Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym2 M∨ .
We will first show that global sections of this has no cohomology in degrees ≤ 0.

  There is a spectral sequence converging to this cohomology whose first page is the
cohomology of
                                Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym2 ( M0 )∨ .
Now,
                   ( M0 )∨ = ⊕i≥1 ( JΩi,∗ )∨ [−i − 1] ⊕ t( JΩ0,∗ )∨ [[t]][−1]
where t has degree 2. Thus, ( M0 )∨ is a direct sum of D-modules of the form ( JΩk,∗ )∨ [−r ]
where the shift is by r ≥ 2. The cohomology of ( JΩk,∗ )∨ is the bundle whose holo-
morphic differential operators from holomorphic k-forms Ωkhol to O. Call this bundle
98                                   KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


Diffhol (Ωk , O ). We thus find

             ( M0 )∨ ≃ ⊕i≥1 (Diffhol (Ωi , O )[−i − 1] ⊕ t Diffhol (O, O )[[t]][−1].

   A holomorphic D-module is a (possibly infinite rank) holomorphic bundle with
a flat holomorphic connection, and so is in particular a C ∞ D-module. The C ∞ D-
module Diffhol (Ωi , O ) arises, of course, from a holomorphic D-module of the same
                                                         ∞
name. Further, for any holomorphic D-module V, if V C refers to the corresponding
C ∞ D-module, then there is a quasi-isomorphism of sheaves

                                Ω3hol ⊗L          ∼ 3,3 ⊗L V C∞ .
                                       Dhol V [3] = Ω    D

Applying this to our situation, we find that

                  Ω3hol ⊗L          ∗    0 ∨
                         Dhol Sym (H (( M ) )[3] ≃ Ω
                                 2                   3,3 L
                                                        ⊗ D Sym2 ( M0 )∨

where H∗ (( M0 )∨ ) refers to the cohomology sheaves, which are holomorphic D-modules.

   Now, the Dhol -modules Diffhol (Ωk , O ) ⊗ Diffhol (Ωl , O ) are flat. It follows that Sym2 H∗ (( M0 )∨ )
is a flat Dhol -module, and that there is a quasi-isomorphism

                  Ω3hol ⊗ Dhol Sym2 (H∗ (( M0 )∨ )[3] ≃ Ω3,3 ⊗L    2   0 ∨
                                                              D Sym ( M ) .

Since the cohomology sheaves of Sym2 ( M0 )∨ are in degrees 4 and higher, we find that
the sheaf on the left hand side of this equation has cohomology sheaves in degrees 1
and higher. This proves that there is no ambiguity in quantizing open-closed (1, 0)-
BCOV theory on X to the annulus level (although there might be an anomaly).

  The only possible contribution to the group controlling anomalies comes from the
piece of Sym2 (H∗ (( M0 )∨ ) in degree 4, which is Sym2 Diffhol (Ω1 , O ). We find that

          H 1 ( X, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym2 ( M0 )∨ ) = H 0 ( X, Ω3hol ⊗ Dhol Sym2 Diffhol (Ω1 , O )).

Since we have a spectral sequence converging to our anomaly group from the group
in the displayed equation, we have

           H 1 ( X, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym2 M∨ ) ⊂ H 0 ( X, Ω3hol ⊗ Dhol Sym2 Diffhol (Ω1 , O )).

(On the left hand side of this is the group containing possible anomalies).

     Next, we will show that for any U ⊂ X, the map

                  H 1 ( X, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym2 M∨ ) → H 1 (U, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym2 M∨ )
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                 99


given by restricting an anomaly to U is injective. To show this, it suffices to show that
the map

   H 0 ( X, Ω3hol ⊗ Dhol Sym2 Diffhol (Ω1 , O )) → H 0 (U, Ω3hol ⊗ Dhol Sym2 Diffhol (Ω1 , O ))

is injective. This is immediate, since the sheaf in question is built from complex ana-
lytic data.

   One of the results of [Cos11] is that anomalies are local, that is, the restriction of
the anomaly cohomology class to some open subset U ⊂ X is determined by the
restriction of the theory on X to U. To show that the annulus anomaly vanishes, we
now need to do so on any open subset U ⊂ X, which we can take to be a polydisc.

  Further, since the annulus anomaly on a polydisc is the restriction of the annulus
anomaly on C3 , it suffices to show that the anomaly on C3 vanishes. For this, we will
use a variant of our argument for the full BCOV theory.

  For the full BCOV theory, we found that the open-string anomaly was of the form
                         Z                              Z
                             Tr( A∂A) Tr((∂A)2 ) +          Tr A Tr(∂A)3 .

There, we were using gl( N | N ) as our gauge group. Further, we saw that this anomaly
cancelled with a contribution from the closed-string sector.

   Clearly the second term in this expression vanishes if we use sl( N | N ). Since our
(1, 0) BCOV theory has fewer fields, it suffices to show that only the first term in the
open-string anomaly cancels with the contribution from (1, 0) BCOV theory.

  Recall that the kernel for the BV odd Poisson bracket for the full BCOV theory is
                                                  ∗,∗              ∗,∗
                        π = (∂ ⊗ 1)δDiag ∈ PV           (C3 )⊗
                                                             b PV (C3 ).

Here PV indicates polyvector fields with distributional coefficients, and ⊗b is the com-
pleted topological tensor product. We can view the right hand side of this as being
polyvector fields with distributional coefficients on C3 × C3 . Also, δDiag is the delta-
current on the diagonal. Normally this would be a distributional form on C3 × C3 , but
we view it as a polyvector field using the isomorphism between forms and polyvector
fields.
                                                                     i,∗
  We let π i,j denote the component of this Kernel which lives in PV ⊗   b PV j,∗ . The
kernel for the odd Poisson bracket for (1, 0) BCOV theory is π 1,1 .
100                                       KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


   The interaction I 1−disk for the full BCOV theory is linear in the closed string fields
of full BCOV theory, and so can be written as a sum of terms

                                            I 1−disk = ∑ Ii,k
                                                          1−disk

                                                             i,k ≥0

        1−disk
where Ii,k     only depends on the fields in tk PVi,∗ . The corresponding interaction for
(1, 0) BCOV theory is
                                     I 1−disk, (1,0) = I1,0
                                                        1−disk    1−disk
                                                               + I0,1    .

   Since the BV Poisson bracket only lives in the subspace of fields which have no
powers of t, we find that the closed string BV Poisson bracket of I 1−disk can be written
as a sum

                        { I 1−disk , I 1−disk }C =         ∑ { Ii,0
                                                                1−disk 1−disk C
                                                                      , Ij,0 }
                                                        i,j,=0...3
                                                                    D                               E
                                                    =     ∑                      1−disk
                                                                        π i,j , Ii,0       1−disk
                                                                                         Ij,0
                                                        i,j=0...3

where h−, −i indicates contraction between polyvector fields on C3 × C3 and elements
of the dual space.

      Further,
                          { I 1−disk, (1,0) , I 1−disk, (1,0) }C = { I1,0
                                                                      1−disk 1−disk C
                                                                            , I1,0 } .
        1−disk
Now, Ii,0      depends on i + 1 open-string fields A ∈ Ω0,∗ (C3 ) ⊗ gl( N | N ) and has a
single trace. We showed in 7.2.4 that
                                                Z                                    Z
              { I 1−disk , I 1−disk }C ( A) =       Tr( A∂A) Tr(∂A)2 +                   Tr( A) Tr((∂A)3 )

(up to some non-zero constant that can be scaled away by redefinition of the fields).
                                                       1−disk
      It follows from this and from the dependence of Ii,0    on the open string fields that
                                                                    Z
                              1−disk 1−disk C
                           { I1,0   , I1,0 } ( A) =                     Tr( A∂A) Tr(∂A)2 .

Since this is the closed-string BV bracket of I 1−disk, (1,0) with itself, we find that the
closed-string annulus anomaly for (1, 0) BCOV theory precisely cancels that form the
open string sector, as desired.                                                          


      One question we have not yet addressed is the following.
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                          101


Theorem. On any Calabi-Yau manifold X, the dynamically-generated classical interaction
for (1, 0) BCOV theory is equivalent to the restriction of the classical interaction of [CL12]
for the full BCOV theory to the fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory. Explicitly, this interaction
is the following. Let us denote the fields of (1, 0) BCOV theory by α ∈ PV1,∗ ( X )[1] and
φ ∈ tPV 0,∗ ( X ). Then the interaction is
                                                     Z
                                   I (α, φ) = ∑          α 3 φ n −3
                                              n ≥3

where we are using the integration map on polyvector fields specified earlier.


Proof. Recall that (1, 0) BCOV theory can be quantized at genus 0 on any Calabi-Yau
manifold, so that the statement makes sense.

   The argument goes as follows. First, we will show that any possible classical in-
teractions on X are determined by their behaviour on an arbitrary open subset of X.
By taking this subset to be a polydisc, and then embedding this polydisc in C3 , this
reduces us to the case X = C3 . In that case, SU (3) and scale invariance, as well as
the classical master equation, fix the form of the classical interaction uniquely up to a
scale. This scale can be fixed using an argument similar to that given in 8.0.10.

   Let us analyze the obstruction-deformation complex controlling possibly classical
interactions on X. As usual, this is built from jets of fields, this time of only the closed-
string sector. These fields can be identified with the double complex

                                    E = Ω2,∗ [1] → Ω3,∗ .

The obstruction-deformation complex is

                                      Ω3,3 ⊗ D O ( J (E ))

as usual.

   Now, the complex E of fields has cohomology the sheaf of closed holomorphic 2-
forms, with a shift of [1]. There is a quasi-isomorphism between the sheaf of closed
holomorphic 2-forms and the complex of sheaves

                                    C[2] → O [1] → Ω1hol

where C is the constant sheaf and Ω1hol is the sheaf of holomorphic 1-forms. Replacing
each term in this complex by a resolution, we find that E is quasi-isomorphic to the
102                                KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


total complex of the double complex of the form

                                Ω∗,∗ [3] → Ω0,∗ [2] → Ω1,∗ [1]

where the first map is projection onto (0, ∗)-forms and the second map is the operator
∂.

  It follows that E (in this model) has a filtration whose associated graded is the direct
sum
                             Gr E = Ω∗,∗ [3] ⊕ Ω0,∗ [2] ⊕ Ω1,∗ [1].

This filtration leads to a convergent spectral sequence for our obstruction-deformation
complex, where the first page of this spectral sequence is built from jets of Gr E .

      The D-module J Gr E of jets of E is quasi-isomorphic to the direct sum
                                      ∞
                            J Gr E ≃ CX [3] ⊕ JOhol [2] ⊕ JΩ1hol [1].

Here CX∞ is the trivial D-module, and JO , JΩ1 refer to jets of holomorphic functions
                                        hol  hol
and one-forms. It follows that the D-module J Gr E arises from a Dhol -module. An
argument on Dhol -module we discussed in the proof of Theorem 9.0.11 tells us that
                                                                        ∞
for any holomorphic D-module M with associated C ∞ D-module MC , we have a
quasi-isomorphism of sheaves
                                           ∞
                              Ω3,3 ⊗L
                                    D M
                                        C
                                          ≃ Ω3,0  L
                                             hol ⊗ Dhol M [3].

Applying this to our situation yields a quasi-isomorphism
                                                                                      
                                  L
Ω3,3 ⊗L     k         ∨      3,0
      D Sym ( J Gr E ) ≃ Ω hol ⊗ Dhol Sym
                                          k                 ∨
                                              Ohol [−3] ⊕ JOhol [−2] ⊕ ( JΩ1hol )∨ [−1] [3].

Now, the dual of JOhol is Dhol , and the dual of JΩ1hol is the space of holomorphic
differential operators Diffhol (Ω1 , O ) from Ω1hol to Ohol . It follows that the complex
Ω3,3 ⊗L       k
       D Sym ( J Gr E ) is a direct summand of
                         ∨

                    n                                                                       o
               L                  ⊗a     ⊗b                         ⊗c
       Ω3,0
         hol ⊗ Dhol   ⊕ a+b+c=k O    ⊗ D hol ⊗ Diff hol ( Ω 1
                                                              , O )    [− 3a − 2b − c + 3 ]   .

Also, a ≤ 1 for symmetry reasons. We are only interested in the case when k ≥ 3
(corresponding to cubic and higher interactions). The D-module inside the tensor
product is flat over Dhol when b + c ≥ 1, which is automatic since k ≥ 3. Therefore,
we can replace the derived tensor product by the underived tensor product.
                         QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                               103


  Each summand in the above expression is a D-module concentrated in a single de-
gree, 3a + 2b + c − 3. The only summands that can contribute to cohomology in de-
gree 0 occur when 3a + 2b + c − 3 ≤ 0, which can only happen (given k ≥ 3) when
a = b = 0, c = 3.

  It follows from this discussion that
                                    
        H 0 X, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Symk (( JE )∨ = 0 if k > 3
                                                                                        
        H 0 X, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Sym3 (( JE )∨ ⊂ H 0 X, Ω3,0hol ⊗ D hol
                                                               ∧ 3
                                                                   ( Diff hol ( Ω 1
                                                                                    , O ))   .

From this it follows that, for every U ⊂ X, the map
                                                                       
            H 0 X, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Symk (( JE )∨ → H 0 U, Ω3,3 ⊗ D Symk (( JE )∨

is injective when k ≥ 3.

  Therefore, to identify our classical interaction on X, we just need to do it locally on
X, and so on C3 .

   On C3 , we are, as usual, interested in SU (3)-invariant and holomorphically trans-
lation invariant interactions. In this case, the obstruction-deformation complex is the
SU (3) invariants in

                                  ∏ Ω3,0      k       ∨
                                     0 ⊗ D Sym J0 (E ) [3]
                                               0
                                  k ≥3

where Ω3,00 is the fibre at zero of the bundle of (3, 0) forms, D0 indicates constant-
coefficient holomorphic differential operators, and J0 (E ) is the fibre at zero of the jet
bundle.

  A variant of the above calculation tells us that H 0 of the obstruction-deformation
complex for constructing the interaction Ik is zero if k > 3, so that we are only con-
cerned with the cubic interaction.

   The argument we used in the proof of 8.0.10 shows that there is up to a scale pre-
cisely one cubic interaction which is SU (3)-invariant and of the correct scaling weight.
Because the cohomology groups where the interactions Ik for k > 3 live are zero, there
is (up to a scale) a single SU (3) invariant solution of the classical master equation with
the correct scaling dimension. It follows that, up to scaling, the dynamically-generated
classical interaction for (1, 0) BCOV theory on C3 is equivalent to this unique solution,
104                                   KEVIN COSTELLO AND SI LI


and so, up to a constant, it is equivalent to the interaction In specified in the statement
of the theorem.

   The constant is fixed, as in the proof of 8.0.10, by the fact that at the level of co-
homology we know that the Lie bracket on the closed-string fields coming from the
classical interaction must be the standard one on divergence-free holomorphic vector
fields.                                                                                



                                            R EFERENCES

[Bau10]  L. Baulieu, SU (5)-invariant decomposition of ten-dimensional Yang-Mills supersymmetry,
         Phys. Lett. B 698 (2011), no. 1, 6367. .
[BCOV94] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Kodaira-Spencer theory of gravity and
         exact results for quantum string amplitudes, Comm. Math. Phys. 165(2), 311–427 (1994).
[CL12]   K. Costello and S. Li, Quantum BCOV theory on Calabi-Y-au manifolds and the higher
         genus B-model, (2012), arXiv:1201.4501[math.QA].
[Cos07]  K. Costello, Topological conformal field theories and Calabi-Yau categories, Adv. Math.
         210(1), 165–214 (2007), arXiv:0412149[math.GT].
[Cos09]  K. Costello, The partition function of a topological field theory, Journal of Topology 2(4)
         (2009), arXiv:0509264[math.QA].
[Cos11]  K. Costello, Renormalization and effective field theory, Surveys and monographs, Ameri-
         can Mathematical Society, 2011.
[Cos13]  K. Costello, Notes on supersymmetric and holomorphic field theories in dimensions 2 and
         4, Pure and applied mathematics quarterly (2013), arXiv:1111.4234[math.QA].
[GT14]   D. Gaiotto and A. Tomasiello, Holography for (1,0) theories in six dimensions, (2014),
         arXiv:1404.0711[hep-th].
[Kap04]  A. Kapustin, Gauge theory, topological strings, and S-duality, (2004), arXiv:0404041[hep-
         th].
[Kon03]  M. Kontsevich, Deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds, Lett. Math. Phys. 66(3),
         157–216 (2003), arXiv:0709040[math.QA].
[KS06]   M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, Notes on A-infinity algebras, A-infinity categories and
         non-commutative geometry, I, (2006).
[Li11]   S. Li, Feynman Graph Integrals and Almost Modular Forms, Commun. Number Theory
         Phys. 6 (2012), no. 1, 129157.
[LQ84]   J.-L. Loday and D. Quillen, Cyclic homology and the Lie algebra homology of matrices,
         Comment. Math. Helv. 59(4), 569591 (1984).
[Lur09]  J. Lurie, On the classification of topological field theories, (2009), arXiv:0905.0465[math.CT].
[MMMS99] M. Marino, R. Minasian, G. Moore and A. Strominger, Nonlinear Instantons from Super-
         symmetric p-Branes, J. High Energy Phys. 2000, no. 1, Paper 5, arXiv:9911206[hep-th].
[MW14]   V. Mikhaylov and E. Witten, Branes And Supergroups, (2014), arXiv:1410.1175[hep-th].
                        QUANTIZATION OF OPEN-CLOSED BCOV THEORY-I                                105


[Ser01]    A. Sergeev, An Analog of the Classical Invariant Theory for Lie Superalgebras, Michigan
           Math J. 49 (2001).
[Tsy83]    B. Tsygan, Homology of matrix algebras over rings and the Hochschild homology, Uspeki
           Math. Nauk. 38, 217218 (1983).
[WC08]     T. Willwacher and D. Calaque, Formality of cyclic cochains, Adv. Math. 231 (2012), no. 2,
           624-650. , arXiv:0806.4095[math.QA].
[Wit92]    E. Witten, Chern-Simons gauge theory as a string theory, The Floer memorial volume, 637-
           678, Progr. Math., 133, Birkhuser, Basel, 1995., arXiv:9207094[hep-th].


   P ERIMETER I NSTITUTE FOR THEORETICAL PHYSICS , WATERLOO , O NTARIO C ANADA N2L 2Y5

   E-mail address: kcostello@perimeterinstitute.ca


   YAU M ATHEMATICAL S CIENCE C ENTER , T SINGHUA U NIVERSITY, B EIJING , 100084, C HINA

   E-mail address: sli@math.tsinghua.edu.cn
