                                              RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM




arXiv:0706.1533v3 [math.QA] 29 Jun 2007
                                                                                  KEVIN COSTELLO


                                                  A BSTRACT. This paper gives a way to renormalise certain quantum field theories
                                                  on compact manifolds. Examples include Yang-Mills theory (in dimension 4 only),
                                                  Chern-Simons theory and holomorphic Chern-Simons theory. The method is within
                                                  the framework of the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism. Chern-Simons theory is renor-
                                                  malised in a way respecting all symmetries (up to homotopy). This yields an invariant
                                                  of smooth manifolds: a certain algebraic structure on the cohomology of the manifold
                                                  tensored with a Lie algebra, which is a “higher loop” enrichment of the natural L ∞
                                                  structure.




                                                                                 1. I NTRODUCTION
                                             This paper gives a method for renormalising a class of quantum field theories. The
                                          field theories we are going to consider have space of fields of the form E = Γ( M, E),
                                          where M is a compact manifold and E is a super vector bundle on M. We work
                                          within the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism, so that E is equipped with an odd symplec-
                                          tic pairing E ⊗ E → C satisfying a certain non-degeneracy condition1. E will also be
                                          equipped with a differential Q, which is an odd differential operator Q : E → E which
                                          is skew self adjoint and of square zero. The action functionals in our quantum field
                                          theory will be of the form
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      he, Qei + S(e)
                                                                                    2
                                          where S is a local functional on the space of fields E , which is at least cubic.
                                             The functional integrals we will renormalise are of the form
                                                                            Z                                    
                                                                                           1            1
                                                            Z ( S, h̄, a) =        exp        h x, Qxi + S( x + a) dx
                                                                              x∈ L        2h̄           h̄
                                          where a ∈ E and L ⊂ E is an isotropic linear subspace, such that the map Q : L →
                                          Im Q is an isomorphism. Such an L is known as a gauge fixing condition. Z ( S, a) is a
                                          formal functional of the variable a ∈ E , and can be viewed as a generating function
                                          for certain Green’s functions of the theory.
                                             A fairly wide class of theories can be put in the form we use, including pure Yang-
                                          Mills theory in dimension 4, and Chern-Simons theory in any dimension.
                                             This introduction will give a sketch of the results and of the underlying philosophy,
                                          without worrying too much about technical details.

                                              1Here, and throughout, ⊗ refers to the completed projective tensor product, so that E ⊗ E =
                                          Γ ( M 2 , E ⊠ E ).
                                                                                           1
2                                      KEVIN COSTELLO


1.1. Our gauge fixing conditions are always of the form
                                           L = Im Q GF
where Q GF : E → E is an odd self adjoint differential operator of square zero, with
the property that the super-commutator
                                            def
                                       H = [ Q, Q GF ]
is a positive elliptic operator of second order. The facts that Q GF is self-adjoint with
respect to the symplectic pairing on E , and that Q GF is of square zero, imply that
L = Im Q GF is an isotropic subspace.
   Only certain theories admit gauge fixing conditions of this form (this is the main
restriction on the kind of theories the techniques from this paper can treat). In many
examples, Q is a first order elliptic operator, and Q GF is a Hermitian adjoint of Q.
   A basic example to bear in mind is Chern-Simons theory in dimension 3. If M is a
compact oriented 3-manifold, and g is a Lie algebra with an invariant non-degenerate
pairing, then
                                    E = Ω ∗ ( M ) ⊗ g[ 1 ] .
[1] denotes parity shift. The symplectic pairing on E arises from the Poincaré pair-
ing on Ω∗ ( M ) and the pairing on g. The operator Q is simply the de Rham differential
d DR , and S is the cubic term in the standard Chern-Simons action. The choice of a met-
ric on M leads to a gauge fixing condition Q GF = d∗DR . Further examples, including
Chern-Simons theory in other dimensions, will be discussed later.

1.2. Let us write
                                      Z T
                         P(ε, T ) =         ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt ∈ E ⊗ E
                                       ε
where Kt ∈ E ⊗ E is the heat kernel for H = [ Q, Q GF ]. Here, E ⊗ E denotes the
completed projective tensor product,
                             E ⊗ E = C ∞ ( M × M, E ⊠ E).
The propagator of our theory is
                                             Z ∞
                             P(0, ∞) =             ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt.
                                              0

This is not an element of E ⊗ E , because of the singularities in the heat kernel at t = 0.
Instead, P(0, ∞) is an element of a distributional completion of E ⊗ E .
  Let O (E ) denote the algebra of functions on E ,
                              O (E ) = ∏ Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn
                                           n≥0

where, as above, the tensor products are completed projective tensor products, and
Hom denotes continuous linear maps.
   Any element P ∈ E ⊗ E gives rise to an order two differential operator ∂ P on O (E )
in a standard way.
                   RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                   3


     Up to a constant factor (the determinant of Q), one can write our functional integral
as                                                                 
                              Z ( S, h̄, a) = lim eh̄∂ P(ε,∞) e S/h̄ ( a).
                                                 ε→0
The right hand side is the exponential of a differential operator applied to a function
on E , yielding a function on E . This identity is rather formal; in finite dimensions, it
is a simple consequence of integration by parts. In infinite dimensions we take it as an
attempt at a definition.
   When ε > 0, the right hand side of this equation is well-defined. However, the ε →
0 limit is singular, because P(0, ∞) is not an element of E ⊗ E , but has singularities
along the diagonal in M 2 .
   Let us use the notation
                                                                    
                          Γ( P(ε, T ), S) = h̄ log eh̄∂ P(ε,∞) e S/h̄ .

This is an h̄ dependent function on E , that is, an element of O (E )[[h̄ ]]. We will typically
omit the variables a ∈ E and h̄ from the notation.
  The expression we would like to make sense of is
                               h̄ log Z ( S, h̄, a) = lim Γ( P(ε, ∞), S).
                                                       ε→0

1.3. An effective action2 at scale ε is a function f ∈ O (E )[[h̄ ]] which describes all in-
teractions occurring at a scale below ε. One can reconstruct the effective action at
any other scale using the effective action at scale ε and the propagator. The map
 f 7→ Γ( P(ε, T ), f ) is the operation taking an effective action at scale ε to the corre-
sponding effective action at scale T. One can imagine that the scale T effective action
Γ( P(ε, T ), f ) is obtained from the scale ε effective action f by allowing particles to
interact according to f , and to propagate a distance between ε and T.
    Γ( P(ε, T ), f ) is the renormalisation group flow from scale ε to scale T applied to f .
This is well-defined for all those f ∈ O (E )[[h̄ ]] which are at least cubic modulo h̄, as
long as 0 < ε < T ≤ ∞. We have the semi-group law
                         Γ( P( T2 , T3 ), Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), f )) = Γ( P( T1 , T3 ), f ).
This equation is a version of the exact renormalisation group equation. The operation
f → Γ( P(ε, T ), f ) is invertible, so that if we know the effective action at any scale, we
know it at all other scales.
   The only part of this renormalisation group flow that is problematic is taking an
effective action at scale 0 and turning it into an effective action at any positive scale ε.
This part of the procedure needs to be renormalised. This is to be expected: an effective
action at scale 0 would describe interactions occurring at infinitely high energy.

   2What I mean by effective action is related to the Wilsonian effective action. Ignoring for the moment
considerations of renormalisation, the Wilsonian effective action is obtained by integrating out all the
high-energy fields, i.e. all the eigenspaces of H with high eigenvalues. The effective action considered
here is obtained by averaging over all interactions occurring at small scales. More precisely, the effective
action at scale ε is the sum over all Feynman graphs of the theory, using the propagator P (0, ε). Using
the propagator P (0, ε) amounts to allowing particles to propagate for a distance of between 0 and ε.
4                                       KEVIN COSTELLO


   One way to phrase the main result we prove is that there is a bijection between
functionals S ∈ O (E )[[h̄ ]], satisfying a locality axiom, and systems { Se f f ( T ) | T ∈
R>0 } of effective actions at all scales T > 0, related by the renormalisation group
equation. The effective action Se f f ( T ) must also satisfy a locality condition as T → 0.
The original action S plays the role of the scale 0 effective action, and the positive scale
effective actions Se f f ( T ) are obtained by renormalising the expression Γ( P(0, T ), S).
Every such system of effective actions Se f f ( T ) arises from a unique local functional S
in this way.

1.4. In order to renormalise the expression limε→0 Γ( P(ε, T ), S), and thus construct the
scale T effective action, we will need a way to extract the “singular part” of expressions
of the form Γ( P(ε, T ), S). This will rely on some results about the small ε asymptotic
expansion of Γ( P(ε, T ), S).
   It’s convenient to represent Γ( P(ε, T ), S) as

                           Γ( P(ε, T ), S) = ∑ h̄i Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S)
                                               i,k≥ 0

where Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) is homogeneous of degree k as a function of a ∈ E . This expres-
sion is just the Taylor expansion of Γ( P(ε, T ), S) as a function of h̄ and a ∈ E . In terms
of Feynman graphs, Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) is the sum over all graphs with first Betti number i
and k external edges.
   Let An((0, ∞)) be the algebra of analytic functions on (0, ∞), where ε is the coor-
dinate on (0, ∞).
Theorem A. There exists a subalgebra A ⊂ An((0, ∞)) with a countable basis, such that
for all local functionals S ∈ O (E )[[h̄]], there exists a small ε asymptotic expansion
                          Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) ≃ ∑ f r (ε) ⊗ Φi,k,r ( T, a)
where f r ∈ A , and Φi,k,r are certain functions of the variables T ∈ (0, ∞) and a ∈ E .
  A functional S ∈ O (E )[[h̄ ]] is local if, roughly, its homogeneous components Si,k ∈
Hom(E ⊗k , C) Sk , which are distributions on the vector bundle E⊠k on M k , are sup-
ported on the small diagonal, and non-singular in the diagonal directions. We will
denote the space of local functionals by
                                        Ol ( E ) ⊂ O ( E ) .
  Let A≥0 ⊂ A be the subspace of those functions whose ε → 0 limit exists. In
order to extract the singular part of functions in A , we need to pick a complementary
subspace to A≥0 .
1.4.1 Definition. A renormalisation scheme is a subspace A<0 ⊂ A such that
                                       A = A≥ 0 ⊕ A< 0 .

  Let us fix a renormalisation scheme A<0 . Later we will see that things are indepen-
dent in a certain sense of the choice of renormalisation scheme.
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                            5


Remark: The functions in A are quite explicit integrals of multi-variable rational func-
tions. The algebra A only depends on the dimension of the manifold M, and not on
the details of the particular theory we are working with.
Remark: Instead of using the algebra A , one could use any larger algebra of functions
on (0, ∞), and obtain the same results. It is technically easier to use an algebra with a
countable basis.
Remark: An alternative regularisation scheme, which Jack Morava suggested to me,
                                   R
would be to use the propagator 0∞ tz ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt, where z is a complex parame-
ter. If we use this propagator, then integrals attached to Feynman graphs converge if
Re z ≫ 0. The expressions should admit an analytic continuation to C with poles on
1
2 Z. Unfortunately, I wasn’t able to prove the existence of the analytic continuation.

1.5. The first main result of this paper is the following.
Theorem B. Fix a renormalisation scheme A<0 ⊂ A . Then there exists a unique series of
counter-terms
                          SCT (h̄, ε, a) = ∑ h̄ i SCT
                                                   i,k (ε, a)
                                                 i> 0,k≥ 0
where
   (1) each SCT
              i,k (ε, a) is a formal local functional of a ∈ E , homogeneous of order k as a
       function of a, with values in A<0 Thus,
                                       SCT
                                        i,k ∈ Ol (E ) ⊗ A< 0
        where Ol (E ) ⊂ O (E ) is the space of local functionals on E .
    (2) the limit
                                   lim Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT )
                                     ε→0
        exists.
These counter-terms are independent of T.
  Let me give a brief sketch of the (surprisingly simple) proof of this theorem. As
before, let us write
                        Γ( P(ε, T ), S) = ∑ h̄ i Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S).
                                                i,k≥ 0
The Γ0,k ( P(ε, T ), S) all have well-defined ε → 0 limits. So the first counter-term we
need to construct is SCT 1,1 . Our choice of renormalisation scheme allows us to extract the
singular part of any function of f (ε) ∈ A ; this singular part is simply the projection
of f onto A<0 . We define
      SCT
       1,1 (ε, a) = singular part of the small ε expansion of Γ 1,1 ( P (ε, T ) , S ) ∈ A< 0 .

It is easy to see that Γ1,1 ( P(ε, T ), S − h̄SCT
                                               1,1 ) is non-singular as ε → 0.
    The next step is to replace S by S − h̄SCT      1,1 , and use this new action to produce the
                       CT
next counter-term, S1,2 . That is, we define
                       SCT                                                 CT
                        1,2 = singular part of Γ 1,2 ( P (ε, T ) , S − h̄S 1,1 )
6                                          KEVIN COSTELLO


where we understand “singular part” in the same way as before. We continue like
this, to define SCT
                 1,k for all k ≥ 1.
   The next step is to define
                                                                                 ∞
                      2,0 = singular part of Γ 2,0 ( P (ε, T ) , S − h̄ ∑ S 1,k )
                                                                            CT
                     SCT
                                                                             k= 0

Continuing in this manner defines all the SCT        i,k .
    The difficult part of the proof is the verification that the counter-terms SCT    i,k are local
functionals. Locality is desirable for many physical and mathematical reasons. More
practically, we need SCT       i,k to be local in order to apply the procedure at the next in-
ductive step. We only know the existence of a small ε asymptotic expansion of the
Γ I,K ( P(ε, T ), S − ∑ h̄i SCT                              CT
                             i,k ) when the counter-terms S i,k are local.
    The main step in the proof of locality is showing that the SCS        i,k are independent of
T. Once we know they are independent of T, we can take T → 0. Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) is
concentrated near the diagonal in M k , if ε < T and both ε, T are very small. Thus, the
counter-terms become supported on the diagonal, and local.
    This theorem allows one to define unambiguously the renormalised scale T effective
action
                          Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) = lim Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT ).
                                                 ε→0
Thus, we can define the renormalised functional integral

    Z R = exp(Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S)/h̄) = renormalisation of
                                              Z                                   
                                                            1            1
                                                     exp       h x, Qxi + S( x + a) dx.
                                                x∈ L       2h̄           h̄
This renormalised partition function is an element of O (E )((h̄)), that is, a non-local
formal function on the space E of fields.

1.6. Independence of choice of renormalisation scheme. We should interpret the ex-
pression Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) constructed using Theorem B as the scale T renormalised ef-
fective action. The renormalisation group equation holds:

                      Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), Γ R ( P(0, T1 ), S)) = Γ R ( P(0, T2 ), S).
1.6.1 Definition. A system of effective actions on the space of fields E is given by an
effective action
                                       Se f f ( T ) ∈ O (E )[[h̄]]
for all T ∈ R>0 , varying smoothly with T, such that
     (1) Each Se f f ( T ) is at least cubic modulo h̄.
     (2) The renormalisation group equation is satisfied,

                              Se f f ( T2 ) = Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), Se f f ( T1 )).
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                          7


   (3) As T → 0, Se f f ( T ) must become local, in the following sense. There must exist some
       T-dependent local functional Φ( T ) such that lim T →0 Se f f ( T ) − Φ( T ) = 0. (The
       T → 0 limit of Se f f ( T ) itself will generally not exist).

   The renormalised effective actions Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) constructed from a local func-
tional S satisfy these two axioms. Thus, for any renormalisation scheme A<0 , theorem
B provides a map
           local functionals S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄ ]] → systems of effective actions
                                             S 7→ {Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) | T ∈ R>0 }.
(The local functionals S must be at least cubic modulo h̄, as must the effective actions
S e f f ( T ). ) .
Theorem C. For any renormalisation scheme A<0 , this map is a bijection.
   This set of systems of effective actions on E is a canonical object associated to
(E , Q, Q GF ), independent of the choice of renormalisation scheme. Renormalisation
and regularisation techniques other than those considered should lead to different
ways of parametrising the same set of systems of effective actions. For instance, if
one could make sense of dimensional regularisation on general manifolds, one would
hope to get simply a different parametrisation of this set.
   From this point of view, the formalism of counter-terms is simply a convenient way
to describe this set of systems of effective actions. The counter-terms themselves, and
the original action S, are not really meaningful in themselves. The main point of in-
troducing counter-terms is that it is otherwise difficult to produce systems of effective
actions. A priori, it is not obvious that there are any non-zero systems of effective
actions at all.
   This proposition makes clear in what sense renormalisation is independent of the
choice of renormalisation scheme. To any renormalisation scheme A<0 and local funct-
ional S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄ ]] corresponds a “theory”, i.e. a system of effective actions. If
A<′ 0 is another renormalisation scheme, there is a unique local functional S′ such that
( S′ , A<′ 0 ) gives the same theory as ( S, A<0 ).
   This statement can be expressed more formally as follows. Let RS denote the space
of renormalisation schemes, and let EA denote the set of systems of effective actions.
Theorem C implies gives an isomorphism of fibre bundles on RS
                                Ol (E ) × RS → EA × RS .
Give the right hand side the trivial flat connection; this pulls back to a non-trivial (and
non-linear) flat connection on Ol (E ). This flat connection is uniquely characterised by
the property that for any flat section S : RS → Ol (E ) × RS, the system of effective
actions {Γ R ( P(0, T ), S(A<0 ))} associated to the functional S(A<0 ) ∈ Ol (E ) is inde-
pendent of the point A<0 ∈ RS.
   We will fix once and for all a renormalisation scheme A<0 . This allows us to always
talk about local functionals, as a convenient proxy for the set of systems of effective
actions. The choice of A<0 is analogous to the choice of a basis in a vector space.
8                                              KEVIN COSTELLO


   All statements about a theory should be expressed in terms of the effective actions
Γ R ( P(0, T ), S), and not directly in terms of the local functional S. This will ensure
everything is independent of the choice of renormalisation scheme.


1.7. Bogoliubov and Parasiuk [BP57], Hepp [Hep66] and Zimmerman [Zim69] have
given an algorithm for the renormalisation of certain quantum field theories. Their
algorithm is based on combinatorial manipulations of Feynman graphs. Recently,
Connes and Kreimer [CK00] have given a beautiful interpretation of the BPHZ al-
gorithm, in terms of the Birkhoff factorisation of loops in a certain Hopf algebra.
   In the approach used in this paper, no graph combinatorics are needed; all we use
is a very simple inductive argument, sketched above. The reason that things become
so simple seems to be the particular kind of functional integrals we consider, which
are always of the form
                                  Z                                                
                                                             1            1
               Z ( S, h̄, a) =                    exp           h x, Qxi + S( x + a) dx.
                                      x∈Im Q GF             2h̄           h̄

Thus, the moral of this paper is that if we consider functional integrals of this form,
then the problem of renormalisation becomes quite simple, and the counter-terms are
unique and automatically local. As we will see shortly, the particular functional inte-
grals we use also play an important role in the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism.
   Another difference between the approach to renormalisation described in this paper
and that of Connes-Kreimer and BPHZ is that we do not give finite values to individ-
ual Feynman graphs, but only to the sum over all graphs with a fixed number of loops
and external edges. From the point of view of the effective action, the expression at-
tached to an individual graph has no meaning.
   If we tried to renormalise different classes of functional integrals the procedure
would not be so simple. For example, if we try to simply renormalise the integral
                          Z                                              
                                                       1            1
                                          exp             h x, Qxi + S( x) dx,
                              x∈Im Q GF               2h̄           h̄

without using the variable a, then there are many possible choices of counter-terms.
  If we try to renormalise the functional integral
                  Z                                                       
                                              1            1       1
                                  exp            h x, Qxi + S( x) + h x, ai dx,
                      x∈Im Q GF              2h̄           h̄      h̄

then the terms in the Feynman graph expansion don’t fit together in the right way to
produce local counter-terms.
  This type of functional integral is one which appears more commonly in the litera-
ture. A simple change of variables allows one to express this type of functional inte-
gral in terms of the kind considered here, but not conversely. Indeed, if a = − Q−1 π b,
where π is the projection onto Im Q GF and Q−1 : Im Q → Im Q GF is the inverse to Q,
                        RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                              9


we can write
  Z                                                        
                            1                 1
                  exp           h x, Qxi + S( x + a) dx
      x∈Im Q GF             2h̄               h̄
                                      Z                                                    
                                                             1                          1
                                    =                exp        h x − a, Q( x − a)i + S( x) dx
                                        x∈Im Q GF           2h̄                         h̄
                                                   Z                                               
                                       −h a,b i/h̄                     1             1       1
                                    =e                         exp        h x, Qxi + S( x) + h x, bi dx
                                                     x∈Im Q GF        2h̄            h̄      h̄
1.8. Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism. The Batalin-Vilkovisky quantum master equa-
tion is the quantum expression of gauge symmetry. It takes the form
                                          ( Q + h̄∆) exp( S/h̄) = 0
where ∆ is a certain order 2 differential operator acting on the space of functionals
on E . This expression makes perfect sense in the simple situation when the space of
fields E is finite dimensional (i.e. the underlying manifold M is of dimension 0). In the
situation we work in, however, this expression is infinite. This is because ∆S involves
the multiplication of singular distributions, and thus has the same kind of singularities
as appear in one-loop Feynman diagrams.
   This paper gives a definition of a renormalised quantum master equation that works
in the infinite dimensional situation. There are regularised BV operators ∆t , for t > 0,
defined by
                                         ∆t = −∂Kt .
Recall that Kt ∈ E ⊗ E is the heat kernel for H = [ Q, Q GF ], and ∂Kt is the order two
differential operator on the algebra O (E ) of functions on E , associated to Kt . The
operators ∆t are thus differential operators on O (E ), for all t > 0. The “physical” BV
operator is ∆0 , which is ill-defined.
1.8.1 Lemma. A function f ∈ O (E )[[h̄]] satisfies the ∆ε quantum master equation
                                              ( Q + h̄∆ε )e f /h̄ = 0
if and only if
                                        Γ( P(ε, T ), f )
satisfies the ∆ T quantum master equation.
  This follows from the fact that
                                            QP(ε, T ) = −KT + Kε
so that the differential operator ∂ P(ε,T ) is a chain homotopy between ∆ε and ∆ T .
   This lemma motivates the following definition.
1.8.2 Definition. A local functional S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄ ]] satisfies the renormalised quantum mas-
ter equation if the renormalised expression
                                 Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) = lim Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT )
                                                     ε→0
satisfies the ∆ T quantum master equation, for some (or equivalently, all) T > 0.
10                                   KEVIN COSTELLO


   Thus, the renormalised QME says that the scale T effective action associated to S
satisfies the scale T quantum master equation.
   One peculiarity of this renormalised quantum master equation is that, unlike in the
finite dimensional situation, it depends on the gauge fixing condition Q GF . We will
see shortly that this dependence is very weak.
   In fact, the equation depends also on the renormalisation scheme A<0 , but only
in an artificial way. Recall that theorem C says that the choice of a renormalisation
scheme sets up a bijection between local functionals S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄]], and systems of
effective actions. The system of effective actions is given by {Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) | T ∈
R>0 }. The quantum master equation as a statement about the system of effective
actions is independent of the choice of renormalisation scheme.
   We will fix once and for all a renormalisation scheme, and use it to parametrise
the set of systems of effective actions. If we use a different renormalisation scheme,
everything works the same, except we are parametrising the set of systems of effective
actions in a slightly different way.

1.9. Homotopies of solutions to the renormalised quantum master equation. Let’s
consider the finite dimensional situation again for a moment, with the further assump-
tion that the finite dimensional space of fields V has trivial Q cohomology. Then the
subspace L ⊂ V is a Lagrangian, and not just isotropic; we have a direct sum decom-
position
                                     V = L ⊕ Im Q.
The importance of the Batalin-Vilkovisky quantum master equation comes from the
fact that in this situation, if S satisfies the Batalin-Vilkovisky quantum master equa-
tion, then the partition function Z ( S, h̄, a = 0) remains unchanged under continuous
variations of L.
   We would like to prove a version of this in the infinite dimensional situation, for
the renormalised quantum master equation. However, things are more delicate in this
situation; the renormalised QME itself depends on the choice of a gauge fixing con-
dition. What we will show is that if Q GF (t) is a one-parameter family of gauge fixing
conditions, corresponding to the family of isotropic subspaces Im Q GF (t), then the set
of homotopy classes of solutions to the renormalised QME using Q GF (0) is isomor-
phic to the corresponding set using Q GF (1). This result is a corollary of a result about
certain simplicial sets of gauge fixing conditions and of solutions to the renormalised
QME.
   Let me explain this picture in more detail. One of the axioms we need for our gauge
fixing conditions is that there is a direct sum decomposition

                             E = Im Q GF ⊕ Ker H ⊕ Im Q
where H = [ Q GF , Q] so that Ker H is the space of harmonic elements of E . This leads
to the identification
                                  H ∗ (E , Q) = Ker H.
This cohomology group is finite dimensional.
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                       11


   There is a notion of homotopy of solutions of the quantum master equation. Briefly,
two solutions S0 , S1 of the quantum master equation are homotopic if there exists
St + dtS′t , for t ∈ [0, 1], such that
                                            
                                       d                ′
                                 Q + dt + h̄∆ e( St +dtSt )/h̄ = 0.
                                       dt
In a similar way, one can define a notion of homotopy of solutions of the renormalised
quantum master equation.
Theorem.        (1) If S satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation, then the restric-
       tion of Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S) to H ∗ (E , Q) satisfies the finite dimensional quantum master
       equation. The map S → Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S) respects homotopies.
   (2) Let Q GF (t) ⊂ E be a smooth one-parameter family of gauge fixing conditions, for
       t ∈ [0, 1]. Then there exists a natural bijection between the set of homotopy classes of
       solutions of the renormalised quantum master equation using the gauge fixing condi-
       tion Q GF (0) and the corresponding set using Q GF (1).
   (3) Let S0 , S1 be solutions of the renormalised quantum master equations using Q GF (0)
       and Q GF (1) respectively, which correspond up to homotopy under the bijection com-
       ing from the family Q GF (t). Then Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S0 ) and Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S1 ) (defined
       using Q GF (0) and Q GF (1) respectively) are homotopic solutions of the quantum mas-
       ter equation on H ∗ (E , Q).
   In fact, this result will be a corollary of a more abstract result concerning simplicial
sets of solutions of the quantum master equation.
Theorem. There exist simplicial sets
    (1) GF(E , Q) of gauge fixing conditions
    (2) BV(E , Q) of solutions of the renormalised quantum master equation on E
    (3) BV( H ∗ (E , Q)) of solutions to the finite-dimensional quantum master equation on
        H ∗ (E , Q )
which fit into a diagram of maps of simplicial sets

                                          Γ R ( P ( 0,∞) , −)
                            BV(E , Q)                           // BV( H ∗ (E , Q))

                                      π
                                 
                            GF(E , Q)

where the vertical arrow π is a fibration of simplicial sets.
   A solution of the renormalised quantum master equation must be with respect
to some gauge fixing condition; this defines the vertical arrow π : BV(E , Q) →
GF(E , Q). The map BV(E , Q) → BV( H ∗ (E , Q)) is the simplicial version of the map
discussed earlier, which takes a solution S of the renormalised quantum master equa-
tion to Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S)| H ∗ (E ,Q) . This is a solution of the quantum master equation on
H ∗ (E , Q ).
12                                    KEVIN COSTELLO


   One can deduce the previous more concrete result from this abstract statement
about simplicial sets using the simplicial analogs of path and homotopy lifting prop-
erties for fibrations.

1.10. We have seen that the set of systems of effective actions is a canonical object as-
sociated to (E , Q, Q GF ), defined with out reference to a renormalisation scheme. In a
similar way, we could say that the simplicial set BV(E , Q) is a canonical object associ-
ated to (E , Q) without reference to the choice of gauge fixing condition. A choice of a
renormalisation scheme and a gauge fixing condition gives us a convenient parametri-
sation of this simplicial set, as a set of local functionals satisfying the renormalised
quantum master equation. However, if we choose a different renormalisation scheme,
we get something canonically isomorphic; and if we choose a different gauge fixing
condition we something canonically homotopy equivalent. (At least, this is true as
long as the space of natural gauge fixing conditions is contractible, which it always
seems to be in examples).
   If we have a classical action S0 which solves the classical master equation, there is
a simplicial set BV(E , Q, S0 ) of quantisations of S0 , i.e. solutions to the renormalised
quantum master of the form S0 + h̄S1 + · · · . If the space of natural gauge fixing con-
ditions is contractible, then this simplicial set is canonically associated to the classical
theory (E , Q, S0 ), up to canonical homotopy equivalences.
   Thus, there is a homotopy action of the group of symmetries of the classical theory
on the simplicial set BV(E , Q, S0 ) of quantisations. One would like to quantise a given
classical theory in a way preserving as many symmetries as possible.

1.11. Quantisation of Chern-Simons theory. The results of this paper allow one to
renormalise a wide variety of quantum field theories, for example Chern-Simons the-
ory on a compact oriented manifold, or pure Yang-Mills theory on a compact 4-dimen-
sional manifold with a conformal class of metrics. By “renormalisation” I simply mean
the construction of counter-terms.
   I would like to distinguish between renormalisation and quantisation. By quanti-
sation I mean the replacement of an action S0 by an action S = S0 + ∑i>0 h̄i Si which
satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation. The only non-trivial theory we
succeed in quantising in this paper is Chern-Simons theory. In fact, we only quantise
Chern-Simons theory modulo the constant term (constant as a function on the space
of fields).
   The quantisation of Chern-Simons theory is based on a general local-to-global prin-
ciple, which allows one to construct global solutions to the renormalised QME from
local ones. This local-to-global result is stated and proved for a general class of the-
ories in the body of the paper. To keep things simple, I’ll only discuss Chern-Simons
theory in this introduction.
   Chern-Simons theory is a perturbative gauge theory associated to a compact ori-
ented manifold M and a flat bundle g of super Lie algebras on M, with an invariant
pairing of parity opposite to that of dim M.
   In this situation, let
                                    E = Ω∗ ( M, g)[1].
                         RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                                            13


E is the Batalin-Vilkovisky odd symplectic manifold associated to the Chern-Simons
gauge theory of connections with values in g.
   A gauge fixing condition on E is given by a choice of a metric on M. The space
of metrics is of course contractible,. As we have seen above, the spaces of homotopy
classes of solutions to the renormalised QME for different gauge fixing conditions are
homotopy equivalent. Thus, one can speak about homotopy classes of solutions to the
renormalised QME without reference to a metric.
Theorem. Let M, g be as above. Then there is a canonical (up to a contractible choice) quan-
tisation S of the Chern-Simons action S0 on E , modulo constant terms.
   That is, there is a canonical up to homotopy functional S = S0 + ∑i>0 h̄i Si on E , where each
Si is defined modulo constants (as a function on E ), which satisfies the renormalised quantum
master equation.
   I should emphasise that the specific form the Si will take is dependent on both
the metric and the renormalisation scheme we choose to work with. If we use a
different renormalisation scheme, then the Si will change, but the effective action
Γ R ( P(0, T ), ∑ h̄i Si ) remains unchanged. If we use a different metric, then this effec-
tive action changes by a homotopy.
Corollary. There is a canonical, up to homotopy and modulo constants, function ΦCS on
                                                     H ∗ (E ) = H ∗ ( M, g)[1]
which satisfies the quantum master equation.
  As ΦCS is well-defined modulo constants, ΦCS is an element of
                                                  !
                                           ΦCS ∈           ∏ Symk H ∗ (E )∨                 [[h̄ ]].
                                                           k> 0

The quantum master equation is
                                                 {ΦCS , ΦCS } + h̄∆ΦCS = 0
which must hold modulo constants, that is, modulo C[[h̄ ]].
  One can write this identity in more explicit terms. The Hamiltonian vector field
associated to ΦCS has Taylor components which are linear maps

                                       ∑ h̄i li,k : H ∗ ( M, g)⊗k → H ∗ ( M, g)[[h̄]].
where li,k is independent of h̄. The li,k are defined for all i, k ≥ 0. The l0,k are the
usual L∞ operations, which arise via the homological perturbation lemma. The li,k for
i > 0 are the new structure. The quantum master equation is encoded in a sequence
of identities of the form

       ∑           ±li1 ,k1 ( x1 , . . . , x j , li2 ,k2 ( x j+1 , . . . , x j+i1 ), x j+i1 +1 , . . . , xi )
     i1 + i2 = i
  k1 + k2 = k− 1

                                 + ∑ ±li−1,k+2 ( x1 , . . . , x j′ , δ′ , x j′ +1 , . . . , x j′′ , δ′′ , x j′′ +1 , . . . , xi ) = 0.
14                                     KEVIN COSTELLO


for all i, k. Here, the xa ∈ H ∗ ( M, g), and ∑ δ′ ⊗ δ′′ ∈ H ∗ ( M, g)⊗2 is the tensor inverse
to the pairing. The first term in this identity is the expression appearing in the usual
L∞ equation. This algebraic structure is sometimes called a “quantum L∞ algebra”.
   As we have seen, the l0,k give the usual L∞ structure on H ∗ ( M, g). These L∞ alge-
bras, for varying g, encode a great deal of the rational homotopy type of M. Thus, the
structure defined by the the li,k for i > 0 can be viewed as a kind of quantisation of the
rational homotopy type.
   In the case when H ∗ (E ) = 0, Kontsevich [Kon94] and Axelrod-Singer [AS92, AS94]
(when dim M = 3) have already constructed the perturbative Chern-Simons invari-
ants. In some sense, their construction is orthogonal to the construction in this paper.
Because we work modulo constants, the construction in this paper doesn’t give any-
thing in the case when H ∗ (E ) = 0. On the other hand, their constructions don’t apply
in the situations where our construction gives something non-trivial.
   There seems to be no fundamental reason why a generalisation of the construction
to this paper, including the constant term, should not exist. Such a generalisation
would also generalise the results of Kontsevich and Axelrod-Singer. However, the
problem of constructing such a generalisation does not seem to be amenable to the
techniques used in this paper.
   A theory related to the Chern-Simons theory considered here has been treated in
the very interesting recent paper [Mne06]. The BF theory used by Mnev is the same
as Chern-Simons theory with a special kind of Lie algebra, of the following form. Let
g be any finite dimensional Lie algebra. Then g ⊕ g∨ is a Lie algebra with an even
invariant pairing, and g ⊕ g∨ [1] is a Lie algebra with an odd invariant pairing. The Lie
algebra structure arises from the fact that g∨ carries a g action. Chern-Simons theory
with Lie algebra g ⊕ g∨ (when dim M is odd) or g ⊕ g∨ [1] (when dim M is even) is the
same as the BF theory considered by Mnev.


1.12. Construction of the quantisation of Chern-Simons theory. Let me sketch the
proof of the theorem on quantisation of Chern-Simons theory. The proof uses the
homotopical algebra of simplicial presheaves to glue together local solutions to the
renormalised quantum master equation to find a global solution.
   Recall that a simplicial presheaf G on M is a presheaf of simplicial sets on M; thus,
for each open set U ⊂ M and each integer n, we have a set G (U, n) of n-simplices of
the simplicial set G (U ).
   Let Met be the simplicial presheaf such that Met (U, n) is the set of smooth fami-
lies of Riemannian metrics on U, parametrised by ∆n . Let FMet ⊂ Met be the sub-
simplicial presheaf given by families of flat metrics.
   It turns out that whether or not an action functional S satisfies the renormalised
quantum master equation is a local property. Further, the statement that S satisfies the
renormalised QME on an open set U depends only on the metric g on U. This is true
also in families, parametrised by simplices. Thus, we can arrange the solutions of the
renormalised QME into a simplicial presheaf on M.
Theorem. There is a simplicial presheaf BV on M, with a map BV → Met, whose 0-
simplices BV(U, 0) are given by
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                       15


    (1) metrics g on U
    (2) a quantisation S of the Chern-Simons action on U, modulo constants. That is, S is a
        solution of the renormalised quantum master equation (modulo constants) associated
        to g, which modulo h̄ is the Chern-Simons action S0 .
The one-simplices BV(U, 1) are homotopies of this data, and so on.
   Our ultimate aim is to construct a canonical (up to contractible choice) point of
Γ( M, BV). Such a point will consist of a metric g on M and a quantisation of the
Chern-Simons action on E to a solution of the renormalised quantum master equation
associated to g, as always modulo constants.
   We can always find a solution to the renormalised QME locally.
Proposition. Suppose an open subset U ⊂ M is equipped with a flat Riemannian metric.
Then the original Chern-Simons action satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation.
Remark: This proposition is the only result in this subsection which is really special
to Chern-Simons theory. The proof of this proposition relies heavily on the work of
Kontsevich [Kon94, Kon03]. In particular, we use the compactifications of configura-
tion spaces used in these papers. The quantum master equation is deduced from a
theorem about the vanishing of certain integrals on configuration spaces proved by
Kontsevich in [Kon94] when dim M > 2 and in [Kon03] when dim M = 2.
  The last proposition shows that we have a map
                                        FMet → BV
of simplicial presheaves on M.
   If G is a simplicial presheaf on M, one can construct its derived global sections
RΓ( M, G ), which is a simplicial set. We use a Čech definition of RΓ( M, G ). If G1 → G2
is a map of simplicial presheaves which induces a a weak equivalence of simplicial sets
G1 (U ) → G2 (U ), for sufficiently small open balls U in M, then the map RΓ( M, G1 ) →
RΓ( M, G2 ) is a weak equivalence.
Lemma. For sufficiently small open balls U in M, FMet (U ) is contractible.
  If U is a ball, then FMet (U ) is the simplicial set associated to the space of flat metrics
on U, which one can show is contractible using a simple rescaling argument.
  It follows that RΓ( M, FMet ) is contractible.
Theorem D. The map
                                 Γ( M, BV) → RΓ( M, BV)
is a weak equivalence.
   This theorem is the heart of the “local-to-global” principle; it allows one to glue
together local solutions to the renormalised QME to give global ones. This result is
stated and proved for a general class of theories in the body of the paper.
   We have a diagram
                                                        ≃
                         RΓ( M, FMet) → RΓ( M, BV) ←
                                                   − Γ( M, BV)
16                                  KEVIN COSTELLO


where the first arrow comes from the map of simplicial presheaves FMet → Met
constructed earlier. The space on the left is contractible, and theorem D says that the
arrow on the right is a weak equivalence. Thus, we get the required point of Γ( M, BV)
up to contractible choice.
1.13. Acknowledgements. This paper benefited a great deal from conversations with
many people. I’d like to thank Dennis Sullivan for inviting me to present these results
in his seminar, and for many helpful conversations. Ezra Getzler’s help with heat
kernels and simplicial methods was invaluable, and made the paper much clearer. A
conversation with Jack Morava was very helpful early on. Arthur Greenspoon’s com-
ments greatly improved the text. I’m also grateful to Mohammed Abouzaid, John
Baez, Alberto Cattaneo, Paul Goerss, Dmitry Kaledin, Pavel Mnev, David Nadler,
Vasily Pestun, Jared Wunsch and Eric Zaslow, for their help with various aspects of
this work.

          2. A CRASH COURSE IN THE B ATALIN -V ILKOVISKY FORMALISM
   This section should probably be skipped by experts; it consists of an informal in-
troduction to the Batalin-Vilkovisky approach to quantising gauge theories. The only
thing which may not be standard is a discussion of a version of the BV formalism
where one integrates over isotropic instead of Lagrangian subspaces.
   In this section, our vector spaces will always be finite dimensional. Of course, none
of the difficulties of renormalisation are present in this simple case. Many of the ex-
pressions we write in the finite dimensional case are ill-defined in the infinite dimen-
sional case.
   Let us suppose we have a finite dimensional vector space V of fields, a group G
acting on V in a possibly non-linear way, and a G-invariant function f on V such that
0 is a critical point of f .
   One is interested in making sense of functional integrals of the form
                                       Z
                                                  e f /h̄
                                           V /G

over the quotient space V /G. The starting point in the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism
is the BRST construction, which says one should try to interpret this quotient in a
homological fashion. This means we should consider the supermanifold
                                       g[ 1 ] ⊕ V
where [1] refers to a change of degree, so g is in degree −1. The space of functions on
this super-manifold is
                               O (g[ 1 ] ⊕ V ) = ∧ ∗ g∨ ⊗ O (V )
which is the super vector space underlying the Chevalley-Eilenberg Lie algebra co-
chain complex for g with coefficients in the g-module O (V ). The Chevalley-Eilenberg
differential gives an odd derivation of O (g[1] ⊕ V ), which can be thought of as an odd
vector field on g[1] ⊕ V. Let us denote this odd vector field by X.
   Recall that this Lie algebra cochain complex computes the homotopy invariants for
the action of g on O (V ). Thus, we can view O (g[1] ⊕ V ), with this differential, as a
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                      17


“derived” version of the algebra of functions on the quotient of V by the action of G
(at least, in a formal neighbourhood of the origin, which is all we really care about).
The BRST construction says one should replace the integral over V /G by an integral
of the form
                                         Z
                                                      e f /h̄ .
                                             g[1]⊕V

    This leaves us in a better situation than before, as we are in a linear space, and we
can attempt to make sense of the integral perturbatively. However, we still have prob-
lems; the quadratic part of the functional f is highly degenerate on g[1] ⊕ V. Indeed, f
is independent of g[1] and is constant on G-orbits on V. Thus, we cannot compute the
integral above by a perturbation expansion around the critical points of the quadratic
part of f .
   This is where the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism comes in. Let E denote the odd
cotangent bundle of g[1] ⊕ V, so that

                            E = g[1] ⊕ V ⊕ V ∨ [−1] ⊕ g∨ [−2].

The various summands of E are usually given the following names: g[1] is the space
of ghosts, V is the space of fields, V ∨ [−1] is the space of antifields and g∨ [−2] is the
space of antighosts.
   The function f on g[1] ⊕ V pulls back to a function on E, via the projection E →
g[1] ⊕ V; we continue to call this function f . By naturality, the vector field X on g[1] ⊕
V induces one on E, which we continue to call X. As [ X, X ] = 0 on g[1] ⊕ V, the same
identity holds on E. As X preserves f on g[1] ⊕ V, it continues to preserve f on E.
   E is an odd symplectic manifold, and X is an odd vector field preserving the sym-
plectic form. Thus, there exists a unique function hX on E whose Hamiltonian vector
field is X, and which vanishes at zero. As X is odd, hX is an even function.
   As E is odd symplectic, the space of functions on E has an odd Poisson bracket. The
statement that [ X, X ] = 0 translates into the equation {hX , hX } = 0. The statement that
X f = 0 becomes {hX , f } = 0. And, as f is pulled back from g[1] ⊕ V, it automatically
satisfies { f , f } = 0. These identities together tell us that the function f + hX satisfies
the Batalin-Vilkovisky classical master equation,

                                  { f + hX , f + hX } = 0.
  Let us write
                                                   1
                             f ( e) + h X ( e) =     he, Qei + S(e)
                                                   2
where Q : V → V is an odd linear map, skew self adjoint for the pairing h i, and S
is a function which is at least cubic. The fact that f + hX satisfies the classical master
equation implies that Q2 = 0. Also, the identity
                                         1
                                     QS + { S, S} = 0
                                         2
holds as a consequence of the classical master equation for f + hX .
18                                                 KEVIN COSTELLO


  Let L ⊂ E be a small, generic, Lagrangian perturbation of the zero section g[1] ⊕
V ⊂ E. The Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism tells us to consider the functional integral
               Z                                             Z
                                                                                1           1
                          exp( f (e)/h̄ + hX (e)/h̄ ) =                 exp(       he, Qei + S(e))
                   e∈ L                                          e∈ L          2h̄          h̄
As L is generic, the pairing he, Qei will have very little degeneracy on L. In fact, if the
complex ( E, Q) has zero cohomology, then the pairing he, Qei is non-degenerate on a
generic Lagrangian L. This means we can perform the above integral perturbatively,
around the critical point 0 ∈ L.

2.1. Quantum master equation. Let us now turn to a more general situation, where
E is a finite dimensional vector space with an odd symplectic pairing, and Q : E → E
is an odd operator of square zero which is skew self adjoint for the pairing. E is not
necessarily of the form constructed above.
   Let xi , ηi be a Darboux basis for E, so that xi are even, ηi are odd, and h xi , ηi i = 1.
Let ∆ be the order two differential operator on E given by the formula
                                                   ∆ = ∑ ∂ xi ∂ηi .
This operator is independent of the choice of basis of E.
  Let S ∈ O ( E)[[h̄ ]] be an h̄-dependent function on E, which modulo h̄ is at least cubic.
The function S satisfies the quantum master equation if
                                                 ( Q + h̄∆)e S/h̄ = 0.
This equation is equivalent to the equation
                                      1
                               QS + { S, S} + h̄∆S = 0.
                                      2
     The key lemma in the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism is the following.
2.1.1 Lemma. Let L ⊂ E be a Lagrangian on which the pairing he, Qei is non-degenerate.
(Such a Lagrangian exists if and only if H ∗ ( E, Q) = 0). Suppose that S satisfies the quantum
master equation. Then the integral
                                      Z
                                                         1           1
                                                 exp(       he, Qei + S(e))
                                          e∈ L          2h̄          h̄
is unchanged under deformations of L.
   The non-degeneracy of the inner product on L, and the fact that S is at least cubic
modulo h̄, means that one can compute this integral perturbatively.
   Suppose E, Q, h , i , S are obtained as before from a gauge theory. Then S auto-
matically satisfies the classical master equation QS + 21 { S, S} = 0. If, in addition,
∆S = 0, then S satisfies the quantum master equation. Thus, we see that we can
quantise the gauge theory in a way independent of the choice of L as long as S sat-
isfies the equation ∆S = 0. When S does not satisfy this equation, one looks to re-
place S by a series S′ = S + ∑i>0 h̄ i Si which does satisfy the quantum master equation
QS′ + 21 { S′ , S′ } + h̄∆S′ = 0.
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                      19


2.2. Geometric interpretation of the quantum master equation. The quantum mas-
ter equation has a geometric interpretation, first described by Albert Schwarz [Sch93].
I will give a very brief summary; the reader should refer to this paper for more details.
   Let µ denote the unique up to scale translation invariant “measure” on E, that is,
section of the Berezinian. The operator ∆ can be interpreted as a kind of divergence
associated to the measure µ , as follows. As E is an odd symplectic manifold, the
algebra O ( E) has an odd Poisson bracket. Every function S ∈ O ( E) has an associated
vector field XS , defined by the formula XS f = { S, f }.
   The operator ∆ satisfies the identity
                                       LXS µ = (∆S)µ
where LXS refers to the Lie derivative. In other words, ∆S is the infinitesimal change
in volume associated to the vector field XS .
   Thus, the two equations
                                         { S, S} = 0
                                             ∆S = 0

say that the vector field XS has square zero and is measure preserving.
   This gives an interpretation of the quantum master equation in the case when S
is independent of h̄. When S depends on h̄, the two terms of the quantum master
equation do not necessarily hold independently. In this situation, we can interpret
the quantum master equation as follows. Let µ S be the measure on E defined by the
formula
                                         µ S = e S/h̄µ .
We can define an operator ∆ S on O ( E) by the formula
                                    LX f µ S = (∆ S f )µ S .

This is the divergence operator associated to the measure µ S , in the same way that ∆
is the divergence operator associated to the translation invariant measure µ .
   Then, a slightly weaker version of the quantum master equation is equivalent to the
statement
                                           ∆2S = 0.
Indeed, one can compute that
                                   h̄∆ S f = { S, f } + h̄∆ f
so that
                           h̄2 ∆2S f = 12 {{ S, S}, f } + h̄ {∆S, f }.
Thus, ∆2S = 0 if and only if 12 { S, S} + h̄∆S is in the centre of the Poisson bracket, that
is, is constant.
    This discussion shows that the quantum master equation is the statement that the
measure e S/h̄ µ is compatible in a certain sense with the odd symplectic structure on E.
20                                      KEVIN COSTELLO


Remark: In fact it is better to use half-densities rather than densities in this picture. A
solution of the quantum master equation is then given by a half-density which is com-
patible in a certain sense with the odd symplectic form. As all of our odd symplectic
manifolds are linear, we can ignore this subtlety.
2.3. Integrating over isotropic subspaces. As we have described it, the BV formalism
only has a chance to work when H ∗ ( E, Q) = 0. This is because one cannot make sense
of the relevant integrals perturbatively otherwise. However, there is a generalisation
of the BV formalism which works when H ∗ ( E, Q) 6= 0. In this situation, let L ⊂ E be
an isotropic subspace such that Q : L → Im Q is an isomorphism. Let Ann( L) ⊂ E be
the set of vectors which pair to zero with any element of L. Then we can identify
                                H ∗ ( E, Q) = Ann( L) ∩ Ker Q.
We thus have a direct sum decomposition
                                 E = L ⊕ H ∗ ( E, Q) ⊕ Im Q.
Note that H ∗ ( E, Q) acquires an odd symplectic pairing from that on E. Thus, there is
a BV operator ∆ H ∗ ( E,Q) on functions on H ∗ ( E, Q). We say a function f on H ∗ ( E, Q)
satisfies the quantum master equation if ∆e f /h̄ = 0.
   The analog of the “key lemma” of the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism is the following.
This lemma is well known to experts in the area.
2.3.1 Lemma. Let S ∈ O ( E)[[h̄ ]] be an h̄-dependent function on E which satisfies the quan-
tum master equation. Then the function on H ∗ ( E, Q) defined by
                                Z                                   
                                              1            1
                    a 7→ h̄ log         exp( he, Qei + S(e + a))
                                   e∈ L      2h̄          h̄
(where we think of H ∗ ( E, Q) as a subspace of E) satisfies the quantum master equation.
  Further, if we perturb the isotropic subspace L a small amount, then this solution of the
QME on H ∗ ( E, Q) is changed to a homotopic solution of the QME.
   Note that since Qa = 0, we can write the exponential in the integrand in the equiva-
            1
lent way ( 2h̄ he + a, Q(e + a)i + h̄1 S(e + a)). Thus, there is no real need here to separate
out quadratic and higher terms. However, in the infinite dimensional situation we
                                                                       1
will discuss later, it will be essential to write the integrand as ( 2h̄  he, Qei + h̄1 S(e + a)),
because we will take a field a which is not closed.
   This integral is an explicit way of writing the homological perturbation lemma for
BV algebras, which transfers a solution of the quantum master equation at chain level
to a corresponding solution on cohomology. From this observation it’s clear (at least
philosophically) why the lemma should be true; the choice of the Lagrangian L is
essentially the same as the choice of symplectic homotopy equivalence between E and
its cohomology. I’ll omit a formal proof for now, as a proof of a more general statement
will be given later.
   Let me explain what a “homotopy” of a solution of the QME is. There is a gen-
eral concept of homotopy equivalence of algebraic objects, which I learned from the
work of Deligne, Griffiths, Morgan and Sullivan [DGMS75]. Two algebraic objects are
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                     21


homotopic if they are connected by a family of such objects parametrised by the com-
mutative differential algebra Ω∗ ([0, 1]). In our context, this means that two solutions
f 0 , f 1 to the quantum master equation on H ∗ ( E, Q) are homotopic if there exists an el-
ement F ∈ O ( H ∗ ( E, Q)) ⊗ Ω∗ ([0, 1])[[h̄ ]] which satisfies the quantum master equation
                                  (d DR + h̄∆ H ∗ ( E,Q))e F/h̄ = 0
and which restricts to f 0 and f 1 when we evaluate at 0 and 1. Here d DR refers to the
de Rham differential on Ω∗ ([0, 1]).
   The quantum master equation imposed on F is equivalent to the equation
                                         1
                               d DR F + { F, F } + h̄∆F = 0.
                                         2
If we write F (t, dt) = A(t) + dtB(t), then the QME imposed on F becomes the system
of equations
                                   1
                                     { A(t), A(t)} + h̄∆A(t) = 0
                                   2
                           d
                              A(t) + { A(t), B(t)} + h̄∆B(t) = 0.
                          dt
The first equation says that A(t) satisfies the ordinary QME for all t, and the second
says that the family A(t) is tangent at every point to an orbit of a certain “gauge group”
acting on the space of solutions to the QME.

                          3. E XAMPLE : C HERN -S IMONS THEORY
   I want to discuss a class of quantum field theories in the Batalin-Vilkovisky formal-
ism. The general definition of the kind of quantum field theory I want to consider
is a little technical, so I will start by discussing a simple example in detail, namely
Chern-Simons theory on a 3-manifold. (Later we will discuss Chern-Simons theory
on a manifold of any dimension). Most of the features of more general theories are
already evident in this example.
   Let M be a compact oriented 3-manifold. Let g be a flat bundle of complex3 Lie
algebras with a complex valued invariant pairing on M. For example, g could be
the adjoint bundle associated to a flat principal SL(n, C) bundle, equipped with the
Killing form.
   We want to quantise the Chern-Simons gauge theory associated to g. This is the
theory whose space of fields V is the space Ω1 ( M, g), which we think of as being the
space of g-valued connections. The Lie algebra of the gauge group is
                                         G = Ω0 ( M, g).
This Lie algebra acts on the space of fields in the usual way that infinitesimal bundle
automorphisms act on connections.
  The Chern-Simons action functional is the function on V given by
                                1            1
                                  hv, dvi + hv, [v, v]i
                                2            3
  3Everything works if we take a real Lie algebra and work over R throughout.
22                                            KEVIN COSTELLO


where d : Ω1 (g) → Ω2 (g) is the operator obtained by coupling the flat connection on
g to the de Rham differential.
   Applying the Batalin-Vilkovisky construction, as described in section 2, yields an
odd symplectic vector space
                            E = G [1] ⊕ V ⊕ V ∨ [−1] ⊕ G ∨ [−2].
If we interpret the duals of the infinite dimensional vector spaces appropriately, we
find that
                                   E = Ω∗ ( M, g)[1].
This is simply because Ω2 ( M, g) has a natural non-degenerate pairing with V =
Ω1 ( M, g), and Ω3 ( M, g) has a natural non-degenerate pairing with Ω0 ( M, g) = G .
   The differential Q : E → E (constructed as in section 2) is simply the de Rham
differential, coupled to the flat connection on g. The odd pairing on E is given by
                                                            Z
                        α ⊗ X, α ′ ⊗ X ′ = (−1)|α |                 α ∧ α ′ X, X ′ g
                                                                M

where α , α ′ ∈ Ω∗ ( M ) and X, X ′ ∈ g. The notation h , ig refers to the invariant pairing
on g.
  The action functional S is given by the formula
                                                            Z
           S(∑ αi ⊗ Xi ) = ∑ (−1)(|αi |+1)(|α j | +1)               α i ∧ α j ∧ α k Xi , [ X j , Xk ] .
              i                i, j,k                           M


3.1. Gauge fixing and functional integrals. As we saw in section 2, the next step in
the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism is the choice of a gauge fixing condition. This is an
isotropic subspace L ⊂ E such that Q : L → Im Q is an isomorphism.
   Picking a metric on M gives an operator d∗ : Ωi ( M ) → Ωi−1 ( M ). This extends to
an operator Q GF : E → E , defined (locally) by
                                        Q GF (ω ⊗ A) = (d∗ω) ⊗ A
where A is a flat section of the bundle g. Our gauge fixing condition will be
                                               L = Im Q GF .
The functional integral we will construct is
                           Z
                                                    1           1
                                            exp(       he, Qei + S(e + a)).
                               e ∈Im Q GF          2h̄          h̄
  Thus, the Chern-Simons gauge theory in the BV formalism is encoded in the fol-
lowing data.
     (1) A vector space E , which is the space of global sections of a super vector bundle
         on a compact manifold M.
     (2) An odd anti-symmetric pairing on E , satisfying a certain non-degeneracy con-
         dition.
     (3) A skew self adjoint operator Q : E → E , of square zero.
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                       23


    (4) An even functional S : E → C which is “local”, meaning roughly that it has
        a Taylor expansion in terms of continuous linear maps E ⊗k → C which are
        distributions on M k , supported on the small diagonal, and non-singular in the
        diagonal directions. (A precise definition will be given soon).
    (5) An auxiliary operator Q GF : E → E , which is a self adjoint elliptic operator of
        square zero.
    (6) The super-commutator [ Q, Q GF ] must be an elliptic operator of order 2 with
        some positivity conditions.

           4. B ATALIN -V ILKOVISKY FORMALISM IN INFINITE DIMENSIONS
   Now we will define the type of quantum field theory we will consider. The defi-
nition consists essentially of abstracting the data we encountered above in the case of
Chern-Simons theory.
4.1. Functionals. If M, N are smooth manifolds and F, G are super vector bundles on
M, N respectively, we will use the notation
                                      Γ( M, F ) ⊗ Γ( N, G )
to denote the space Γ( M × N, F ⊠ G ) of smooth sections of F ⊠ G. In other words, ⊗
refers to the completed projective tensor product where appropriate.
   Let E be a super vector bundle over C on a compact manifold M. Let E denote the
space of global sections of E.
4.1.1 Definition. Let O (E ) be the algebra
                               O (E ) = ∏ Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn
                                          n≥0
where Hom denotes the space of continuous linear maps, and the subscript Sn denotes taking
Sn coinvariants.
  Direct product of distributions makes O (E ) into an algebra.

   We can view O (E ) as the algebra of formal functions at 0 ∈ E which have Taylor
expansions of the form
                                    f ( e) = ∑ f i ( e⊗ i )
where each
                                        f i : E ⊗i → C
is a continuous linear map (i.e. a distribution).
4.1.2 Definition. Let X be an auxiliary manifold. Define
                        O (E , C ∞ ( X )) = ∏ Hom(E ⊗n , C ∞ ( X )) Sn
                                            n≥0
where, as before, we take the space of continuous linear maps.

    Thus, O (E , C ∞ ( X )) is a certain completed tensor product of O (E ) and C ∞ ( X ). Let
h̄ be a formal parameter. Let
                           O (E , C[[h̄ ]]) = lim O (E ) ⊗ C[h̄ ]/h̄ n .
                                              ←−
24                                                  KEVIN COSTELLO


Similarly, let O (E , C ∞ ( X ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) be the inverse limit lim O (E , C ∞ ( X )) ⊗ C[h̄ ]/h̄ n .
                                                                 ←−
4.2. Local functionals.
4.2.1 Definition. Let Diff ( E, E′ ) denote the infinite rank vector bundle on M of differential
operators between two vector bundles E and E′ on M. Let
       PolyDiff (Γ( E)⊗n , Γ( E′ )) = Γ( M, Diff ( E, C)⊗n ⊗ E′ ) ⊂ Hom(Γ( E)⊗n , Γ( E′ ))
where C denotes the trivial vector bundle of rank 1. All tensor products in this expression are
fibrewise tensor products of vector bundles on M.

  It is clear that PolyDiff (Γ( E)⊗n , Γ( E′ )) is the space of sections of an infinite rank
vector bundle on M. If F is a super vector bundle on another manifold N, let
                                     PolyDiff (Γ( E)⊗n , Γ( E′ )) ⊗ Γ( F )
denote the completed projective tensor product, as usual, so that
         PolyDiff (Γ( E)⊗n , Γ( E′ )) ⊗ Γ( F ) = Γ( M × N, (Diff ( E, C)⊗n ⊗ E′ ) ⊠ F ).
If X is a manifold, we can think of PolyDiff (Γ( E)⊗n , Γ( E′ )) ⊗ C ∞ ( X ) as the space of
smooth families of polydifferential operators parametrised by X.
   One can give an equivalent definition of polydifferential operators in terms of local
trivialisations {ei }, {e′j } of E and E′ , and local coordinates y1 , . . . , yl on M. A map
Γ( E)⊗n → Γ( E′ ) is a polydifferential operator if, locally, it is a finite sum of operators
of the form
              f 1 ei1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ f n ein 7→ ∑ e′j Φi1 ...in ( y1 , . . . , yl )( D Ii1 f 1 ) · · · ( D Iin f n )
                                                        j

                                                j
       j
where Φi1 ...in ( y1 , . . . , yl ) are smooth functions of the yi , the Ik are multi-indices, and
the operators D Ik are the corresponding partial derivatives with respect to the yi .
4.2.2 Definition. Let
                                Ol (E ) ⊂ O (E ) = ∏ Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn
                                                            n≥0

be the space of formal functionals on E , each of whose Taylor series terms f n : E ⊗n → C
factors as
                                                                            R
                                 E ⊗n → Densities ( M ) −→ C
                                                                                M


where the first map is a polydifferential operator.
  Elements of Ol (E ) will be called local functionals on E .
  If X is another manifold (possibly with corners), and F is a super vector bundle on X, let
                Ol (E , Γ( X, F )) ⊂ O (E , Γ( X, F )) = ∏ Hom(E ⊗n , Γ( X, F )) Sn
                                                                     n≥0

be the subspace of those functions each of whose terms factors as
                                                                                    R
                           E ⊗n → Densities( M ) ⊗ Γ( X, F ) −→
                                                              M
                                                                Γ( X, F )
where the first map is in PolyDiff (E ⊗n , Densities( M )) ⊗ Γ( X, F ).
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                            25


  Elements of Ol (E , C ∞ ( X )) are smooth families of local functionals parametrised by
a manifold X. We will use a similar notation when we want to take functionals with
values in C[[h̄ ]]. Let
                          Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) = lim Ol (E ) ⊗ C[h̄ ]/h̄ n .
                                               ←−
We can define Ol (E , C ∞ ( X ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) as an inverse limit in the same way.
Remark: The space Ol (E ) is not an algebra; the product of two local functionals is not
local.
   If f ∈ Ol (E ) is a local functional, then the i-th term of its Taylor expansion f i :
E ⊗i → C is assumed to factor through a map E ⊗i → Densities ( M ). Note that there
will in general exist many such factorisations. However, we have
4.2.3 Lemma. If
                                       Φ : E ⊗n → C
is a map which factorises through a polydifferential operator E ⊗n → Densities ( M ), there is
a unique polydifferential operator
                         Ψ : E ⊗n−1 → Γ( E∨ ) ⊗C∞ ( M) Densities( M )
such that                                       Z
                      Φ ( e1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ en ) =           h Ψ( e1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ en− 1 ) , en i .
                                                    M


Proof. This is an easy calculation in local coordinates.                                         
4.3. Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism.
4.3.1 Definition. An odd symplectic structure on E is a map
                                 h , i M : E ⊗ E → Densities M
of graded vector bundles on M, which is odd, antisymmetric, and non-degenerate, in the sense
that the associated map E → E∨ ⊗ Densities M is an isomorphism.

  Such an odd symplectic structure induces an odd pairing
                                       h , i : E ⊗C E → C
on E .
4.3.2 Lemma. An odd symplectic structure on E induces an odd Poisson bracket on the space
Ol (E ) of local functionals. Further, if f ∈ Ol (E ) is local and g ∈ O (E ) is possibly non-local,
the Poisson bracket { f , g} is well-defined.
Proof. This is an immediate corollary of Lemma 4.2.3. Indeed, this lemma shows that
any local functional on E can be replaced by something which has a Taylor expansion
in terms of polydifferential operators E ⊗n → E . Here we are using the identification
of E with Γ( E∨ ) ⊗C∞ ( M) Densities ( M ) given by the odd symplectic form.
   Something with a Taylor expansion in terms of maps E ⊗n → E can be considered to
be a formal vector field on E . This yields the Hamiltonian vector field on E associated
to a local functional. The usual formula for the action of vector fields on functions
26                                      KEVIN COSTELLO


defines the Poisson bracket { f , g} if f ∈ Ol (E ) and g ∈ O (E ). Since this formula
amounts to inserting the output of the map E ⊗n → E into the input of a map E ⊗k → C,
everything is well-defined.                                                         
  In general, the Poisson bracket of two non-local functionals may be ill-defined.
  Let us fix, for the rest of the paper, the following data:
    (1) A compact manifold M with a complex super vector bundle E on M, whose
        algebra of global sections is denoted (as above) by E .
    (2) An odd linear elliptic differential operator Q : E → E , which is self adjoint
        and satisfies [ Q, Q] = 0. Q induces a differential on all the spaces associated to
        E , such as Ol (E ) and O (E ).
A local functional S ∈ Ol (E ), which is at least cubic, satisfies the classical master
equation if
                                             1
                                     QS + { S, S} = 0.
                                             2
We will try to quantise, within the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism, field theories whose
action functionals are of the form
                                        1
                                          he, Qei + S(e)
                                        2
where S ∈ Ol (E ) satisfies the classical master equation. A wide class of quantum field
theories of physical and mathematical interest, including for instance pure Yang-Mills
theory, appear in this way.
4.3.3 Definition. Let ( M, E , Q, h , i) be as above. A gauge fixing condition is an odd linear
differential operator
                                          Q GF : E → E
such that
     (1) Q GF is skew self adjoint with respect to the odd symplectic pairing on E .
     (2) Q GF is an operator of order ≤ 1.
     (3) [ Q GF , Q GF ] = 0.
     (4) the operator
                                         H := [ Q, Q GF ]
         is a second order elliptic operator, which is a generalised Laplacian in the sense of
         [BGV92]. This means that the symbol
                             σ ( H ) ∈ Γ( M, Sym2 TM ⊗ End E)
         is a positive definite metric on T ∗ M, tensored with the identity map E → E.
     (5) There is a direct sum decomposition
                               E = Im Q ⊕ Im Q GF ⊕ Ker H.

   The fourth condition is a little restrictive. Even so, many interesting quantum field
theories admit a natural collection of such gauge fixing conditions. This condition
is imposed because I need to use the asymptotic expansion of the heat kernel of H
proved in [BGV92].
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM               27


                                     5. E XAMPLES
5.1. φ4 theory. The φ4 theory is a standard simple example of a quantum field the-
ory. The Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism does not say anything interesting about the φ4
theory, because it is a simple bosonic field theory with no gauge symmetries.
   In our setting, the φ4 theory works as follows. We take M to be a compact Riemann-
ian manifold. Let
                        E = E 0 ⊕ E 1 = C ∞ ( M, C) ⊕ ΠC ∞ ( M, C)
where Π refers to parity reversal. Let e0 ∈ E 0 , e1 ∈ E 1 be the elements which cor-
respond to the identity function on M. The odd symplectic pairing on E is defined
by                                           Z
                                  hφe0 , ψe1 i =       φψ
                                                   M
where φ, ψ ∈ C ∞ ( M, C) and the integration is taken using the measure associated to
the Riemannian metric.
  The operator Q is defined by
                                Q(φe0 ) = (∆φ + m2φ)e1
                                Q(φe1 ) = 0
where m ∈ R>0 is a “mass” parameter, and ∆ is the Laplacian on C ∞ ( M ) associated
to the Riemannian metric.
   The action S is defined by
                                                   Z
                                 S(φe0 + ψe1 ) =           φ4 .
                                                       M
Then                                          Z
                  1                           1      1
                    hφe0 , Qφe0 i + S(φ) =      φ∆φ + m2φ2 + φ4
                  2                         M 2      2
                                   4
which is the usual action for the φ theory.
 The gauge fixing operator Q GF on E is defined by
                                    Q GF (φe1 ) = φe0
                                    Q GF (φe0 ) = 0.
The operator H = [ Q GF , Q] is given by
                                H (φei ) = (∆φ + m2φ)ei
for i = 0, 1. As required, this is a generalised Laplacian. Also,
                             E = Ker H ⊕ Im Q GF ⊕ Im Q.
Note that these axioms would not be satisfied if m = 0, because Ker H ∩ Im Q GF would
not be zero.
  The functional integral we will construct is
                    Z                     Z                      
                                        −1     1      1 2 2     4
                                 exp h̄          φ∆φ + m φ + φ .
                      x∈C∞ ( M )             M 2      2
28                                                   KEVIN COSTELLO


Of course, this construction works if we use any polynomial of φ which is at least
cubic in place of φ4 .
   Because the space of fields is concentrated in degrees 0 and 1, any local functional
which is homogeneous of degree 0 satisfies the renormalised quantum master equa-
tion.
5.2. Yang-Mills theory. We will use a certain first order formulation of Yang-Mills
theory, well-known in the physics literature [MZ96, Wit04]. This was studied in the
Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism in [Cos06]. I don’t see how to fit the standard formu-
lation of Yang-Mills theory into the framework of this paper; the problem is that I
don’t see how to construct gauge fixing conditions of the type we need. I will refer to
[Cos06] for details of this construction.
   Let M be a compact oriented 4 manifold, and let V be a vector bundle on M with a
connection A satisfying the Yang-Mills equation
                                                     d A F ( A)+ = 0.
In [Cos06] a certain differential graded algebra B was constructed from ( M, V, A),
which looks like
              Ω0 (End(V ))                                                             degree 0
                                    NNN
                                       NNN
                                          NNN
                                             N−[
                                              NNFN( A)+ , ]
                  dA                              NNN
                                                      NNN
                                                          NNN
                                                           N&&
              Ω1 (End(V ))                           ⊕         Ω2+ (End(V ))           degree 1
                                    MMM                          qq
                                  −[ F( A) + ,MM ]            qqq
                                             MMM      qId
                                                M qqqq
                 d A+                            q M
                                               qq MMMM                          −d A
                                          qqqqq         MMM
                                       qqq                 MMM
                                  xxq                       &&      
              Ω2+ (End(V ))                          ⊕         Ω3 (End(V ))            degree 2
                                    NNN
                                       NNN
                                          NNN
                                             N−[
                                              NNFN( A)+ , ]
                                                   NNN                          −d A
                                                      NNN
                                                          NNN
                                                             N&&           
                                                               Ω4 (End(V ))            degree 3
The arrows describe the differential Q in B. The algebra B also has a trace of degree
−3, which comes from trace over V and integration over M. This trace induces an odd
symmetric pairing Tr ab on B.
  Let E = B [−1] be B shifted by one, with differential Q inherited from B. The
pairing on B induces a symplectic pairing on E . Define a functional S on E by
                                                         S(e) = Tr a3 .
It was observed in section 3.3 of [Cos06] that E , with this action functional, is the
Batalin-Vilkovisky odd symplectic space associated with the first order formulation
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                  29


of pure Yang-Mills gauge theory, as studied in for instance [MZ96, Wit04]. Indeed,
E −1 = B 0 is the space of ghosts, E 0 = B 1 is the space of fields, E 1 = B 2 is the space
of antifields, and E 2 = B 3 is the space of antighosts.
   The choice of a metric on M and a Hermitian metric on the vector bundle V leads
to a Hermitian metric on B. The operator Q GF is the Hermitian adjoint to Q. This
operator satisfies the axioms of a gauge fixing condition.

5.3. Holomorphic Chern-Simons. Let M be a Calabi-Yau manifold of odd complex
dimension. Fix a holomorphic volume form ΩVol on M. Let g be a complex Lie algebra
with a non-degenerate , symmetric, invariant pairing h , i. Let
                                    E = Ω0,∗ ( M ) ⊗C g.
E has an odd symplectic pairing, defined by
                                                   Z
                   α ⊗ X, α ′ ⊗ X ′ = (−1)|α |             ΩVol ∧ α ∧ α ′ X, X ′
                                                       M

where α ∈ Ω0,∗ ( M ) and X ∈ g.
 Define S ∈ Ol (E ) by
                                                   Z
      S(∑ αi ⊗ Xi ) = ∑ (−1)(|αi |+1)(|α j | +1)           ΩVol ∧ αi ∧ α j ∧ αk Xi , [ X j , Xk ] .
         i              i, j,k                         M

This is the holomorphic Chern-Simons action functional.
                                                  ⋆
  Picking a metric on M leads to an operator ∂ on Ω0,∗ , and so on E . This is the
                                                ⋆
gauge fixing operator. The operator H = [∂, ∂ ] is a generalised Laplacian.
  The functional integral we will renormalise is
                       Z               D       E 1          
                                        1
                                ⋆
                                  exp      x, ∂x + S( x + a) .
                         x∈Im ∂        2h̄          h̄
   This theory can be generalised in several directions. Firstly, we can take g to be a
non-trivial holomorphic vector bundle on M with a Lie algebra structure (i.e. a sheaf
of Lie algebras over the sheaf of holomorphic functions on M). In that case, to get a
gauge fixing condition would require the choice of both a metric on M and a Hermitian
metric on the vector bundle.
   If M is of even complex dimension, one can take g to be a super-Lie algebra with an
odd invariant pairing (see [AKSZ97]). Of course, there is a version of this where we
take a sheaf of such super-Lie algebras.
   Yet another direction is to use L∞ rather than Lie algebras. In that case the action
S is no longer purely cubic, but has higher-order contributions from the higher L∞
operations. Such theories are also discussed in [AKSZ97].

5.4. Higher dimensional Chern-Simons. We have already discussed Chern-Simons
theory in dimension three. One can readily generalise this theory to manifolds of
arbitrary dimension, just as with holomorphic Chern-Simons theory.
   For odd-dimensional manifolds, one takes a complex Lie algebra g with an invariant
pairing, and sets E = Ω∗ ( M ) ⊗ g[1]. The Chern-Simons action is given by essentially
30                                            KEVIN COSTELLO


the same formula as in the 3-dimensional case:
                                    ( |α i |+ 1 )( |α j | + 1 )
                                                                Z
         S(∑ αi ⊗ Xi ) = ∑ (−1)(−1)                               α i ∧ α j ∧ α k Xi , [ X j , Xk ]
                i                i, j,k                          M

where αi ∈ Ω∗ ( M ) and Xi ∈ g. The operator Q is defined to be the de Rham differ-
ential d. If we pick a metric on M then we can define Q GF to be the adjoint operator
d⋆ .
   As with holomorphic Chern-Simons theory, this can be generalised in various di-
rections. Firstly, we could replace g by a locally trivial sheaf of Lie algebras. Or, we
could use a sheaf of L∞ algebras instead Lie algebras.
   In the case when M is even-dimensional, we can take g to be an L∞ algebra with an
odd invariant pairing, or a locally trivial sheaf of such.
   A particularly interesting case occurs when dim M = 2. Two dimensional Chern-
Simons theory (introduced in [AKSZ97]) is essentially the same as the Poisson sigma
model. This theory is used in the proof of Kontsevich’s formality theorem [Kon03,
CF01].
   If g is an L∞ algebra with an odd invariant pairing, then we can identify geven =
(g )∨ [1]. Thus, if we let V = godd [1], so that V is a purely even vector space, then
  odd

                                               g[1] = ΠT ∗ V.
The L∞ structure on g is described by a function f on g[1] = ΠT ∗ V, satisfying the
classical master equation { f , f } = 0.
   We can identify functions on ΠT ∗ V with polyvector fields on V, that is,
                                    O (ΠT ∗ V ) = ⊕i ∧i TV ⊗ O (V ).
The Poisson bracket on O (ΠT ∗ V ) corresponds to the Schouten bracket on polyvector
fields.
   Thus, the L∞ structure on g defines a generalised Poisson structure on V. If this L∞
structure is purely quadratic in the gev [1] variables, then we find a Poisson structure
in the classical sense on V.
   The space
                                  E = Ω ∗ ( M ) ⊗ g[ 1 ]
can be identified with the supermanifold of maps ΠTM → ΠT ∗ V, leading to the sigma
model interpretation of the theory.

                                     6. D IFFERENTIAL OPERATORS
6.1. Functor of points approach to formal super geometry. In order to clarify sign is-
sues, we will use the “functor of points” approach to formal super geometry. A formal
super-space is viewed as a functor from the category of nilpotent local commutative
super-algebras to the category of sets. For example, the formal super-space Am,n sends
                       ⊕n
R 7→ ( Rev )⊕m ⊕ Rodd      .
   If
                                    V = V ev ⊕ V odd
is a Z/2-graded vector space, the formal super-space V sends R 7→ (V ⊗ R)ev .
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                      31


  An even formal function on V is then a natural transformation of functors V → A1,0 ,
and an odd formal function on V is a natural transformation to V → A0,1 . More
explicitly, an even formal function f on V is a collection of maps
                                   f R : (V ⊗ R)ev → Rev ,
natural with respect to morphisms R → R′ of nilpotent local commutative super-
algebras.
   Let us denote by O ′ (V ) the Z/2-graded algebra of all formal functions on V. We
can identify this algebra with the inverse limit
                            O ′ (V ) = lim Sym∗ V ∨ / Sym≥n V ∨ .
                                       ←−
   In particular, if E as above is the global sections of some super vector bundle E
on M, we can think of E as an infinite dimensional formal super-space. The algebra
O (E ) is a subalgebra of the algebra O ′ (E ). An element of O ′ (E ) is in O (E ) whenever
its Taylor expansion is in terms of continuous linear maps on E ⊗n .
   In the case when M is a point, so that E is simply a finite dimensional super vector
space, then O (E ) and O ′ (E ) coincide.

6.2. Derivations. The functor of points way of looking at things is useful (for in-
stance) when thinking about derivations of the algebra O (E ). Everything we do could
also be written more explicitly, but the advantage of the functor of points formalism is
that it allows one to essentially forget about signs.
   Let ε be an odd parameter. One can define the derivation Q of O (E ) by the formula
                             f ( x + ε Qx) = f ( x) + ε( Q f )( x).
The left hand side is defined using the language of the functor of points, as follows.
For each nilpotent local commutative superalgebra R as above, f gives a map
                                           (
                                       ev    ( R ⊗ C[ε])ev if f is even
              f R⊗C[ε] : (E ⊗ R ⊗ C[ε]) →
                                             ( R ⊗ C[ε])odd if f is odd.
If x ∈ (E ⊗ R)ev , then x + ε Qx is in (E ⊗ R ⊗ C[ε])ev . Thus, f ( x + ε Qx) ∈ ( R ⊗ C[ε]).
The coefficient of ε in f ( x + ε Qx) gives a map (E ⊗ R)ev to Rev (if f is odd), or to Rodd
(if f is even), and so a formal functional on E of parity opposite to that of f . This is
defined to be Q f .
   A priori, this construction only yields a derivation of O ′ (E ), but one can check
easily that this derivation preserves the subalgebra O (E ). In more explicit terms, if
we identify
                              O (E ) = ∏ Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn ,
then the derivation Q preserves each factor Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn . On each such factor, Q
is simply the usual tensor product differential on each E ⊗n , which we then transfer to
the dual space and to the space of Sn coinvariants.
   To compute the commutator of derivations in terms of the functor of points is very
simple. Let D1 , D2 be derivations of O ′ (V ), where Di is given by an automorphism
32                                     KEVIN COSTELLO


of O ′ (V ) ⊗ C[εi ]/(ε2i ), which modulo εi is the identity. The parameter εi has the same
parity as Di . We can compute the commutator by
            (1 + ε1 D1 )(1 + ε2 D2 )(1 − ε1 D1 )(1 − ε2 D2 ) = 1 + ε1ε2 [ D1 , D2 ].
  Let e ∈ E . Differentiation with respect to e is an operator ∂e : O ′ (E ) → O ′ (E )
defined by the formula
                              f ( x + εe) = f ( x) + ε∂ e f
where ε is an auxiliary parameter of the same parity as e, and of square 0.
  It is easy to see that this derivation preserves O (E ). Indeed, if we identify O (E ) =
∏ Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn , then the derivation ∂e is (up to sign) the map
                         Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn → Hom(E ⊗n−1 , C) Sn−1
given by contraction with e.
  One can compute easily that
                                        [∂e , Q] = ∂ Qe .
6.3. Convolution operators. If K ∈ E ⊗ E , define a convolution map K ⋆ : E → E by
the formula
                          K ⋆ e = (−1)|e| ∑ K ′ ⊗ K ′′ , e
where K = ∑ K ′ ⊗ K ′′ . The reason for the choice of sign in the definition of the convo-
lution is that
                                  ( QK ) ⋆ e = [Q, K ⋆]e.
The first Q in this formula denotes the tensor product differential on E ⊗ E .
6.3.1 Lemma. An element K ∈ E ⊗ E is symmetric if and only if the map K ⋆ is self adjoint,
and is antisymmetric if and only if K ⋆ is skew self adjoint.
6.4. Order two differential operators. Let
                                φ = ∑ φ′ ⊗ φ′′ ∈ Sym2 E .
Associated to φ we have an order two differential operator ∂φ on O (E ), given by the
formula
                          1             1
                    ∂φ = ∑ ∂φ′′ ∂φ′ = ∑(−1)|φ ||φ | ∂φ′ ∂φ′′ .
                                                    ′ ′′

                          2             2
Even though the sum may be infinite, this expression is well defined; up to sign, ∂φ
comes from the map
                         Hom(E ⊗n , C) Sn → Hom(E ⊗n−2 , C) Sn−2
given by contraction with φ.
  The differential operators ∂φ mutually super-commute, and
                                       [∂φ , Q] = ∂ Qφ .
  If e ∈ E , let e∨ : E → C be the continuous linear functional given by e∨ (e′ ) = he′ , ei.
Note that e∨ ∈ O (E ), so there is an associated left multiplication map O (E ) → O (E ).
The following lemma will be useful later.
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                       33


6.4.1 Lemma. If φ ∈ Sym2 E is even, then
                                       [∂φ , e∨ ] = −∂φ⋆e .
Proof. In the language we are using for formal functions, if R is an auxiliary nilpotent
ring, and r ∈ R, η ∈ E are elements of the same parity, then by definition
                                e ∨ (r η ) = hr η , e i = r h η , e i .
Therefore, in particular,
                                           ∂e ′ e∨ = e′ , e
for all e′ ∈ E .
   We can assume
                                                           ′       ′′
                            φ = φ′ ⊗ φ′′ + (−1)|φ ||φ |φ′′ ⊗ φ′ .
Then
                                           ∂φ = ∂φ′′ ∂φ′ .
Then
                                                               ′
                    [∂φ , e∨ ] = φ′ , e ∂φ′′ + (−1)|φ |(|e|+1) φ′′ , e ∂φ′′
whereas
                                                                        ′′   ′
               φ ⋆ e = (−1)|e| φ′′ , e φ′ + (−1)|e|+|φ ||φ | φ′′ , e φ′ .
The lemma follows from these two equations.                                                
6.5. Heat kernels. A heat kernel for the operator H : E → E is an element
                                  Kt ∈ E ⊗ 2 = Γ ( M 2 , E ⊠ E ) ,
defined for t ∈ R>0 , such that
                                      Kt ⋆ e = e−tH e
for all e ∈ E . Because H is a generalised Laplacian, the results of [BGV92] imply that
it admits a unique heat kernel Kt , which is also smooth as a function of t.
   Let
                                    Lt = ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt
so that Lt is the kernel representing the operator Q GF e−tH . This is a smoothing opera-
tor for 0 < t ≤ ∞, so that Lt ∈ E ⊗ E for such t.
   Observe that
                                        ( Q ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ Q ) Kt = 0
                           d
                             Kt + ( Q ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ Q) Lt = 0.
                          dt
These formulae together say that the expression
                                             Kt + dtLt
is a closed element of E ⊗ E ⊗ Ω∗ (R       > 0 ), where we give this space the tensor product
differential.
   Let                               Z T             Z T
                        P(ε, T ) =         Lt dt =         ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt.
                                       ε               ε
34                                                      KEVIN COSTELLO


Note that for 0 < ε < T ≤ ∞, P(ε, T ) is in E ⊗ E . This is clear if 0 < ε < T < ∞. If
T = ∞, one needs to check that
                                                         Z ∞
                                               α 7→               Q GF e−tHα dt
                                                          ε
is a smoothing operator for any t > 0. The only problems that could occur would
be on the 0 eigenspace of H, but Q GF annihilates this eigenspace. This is one of the
axioms of a gauge fixing condition.
   The reason the kernels P(ε, T ) are important comes from the following lemma.
6.5.1 Lemma. The operator
                                           Im Q → Im Q GF
                                                           Z ∞
                                                    α 7→           Q GF e−tHα dt
                                                              0

is the inverse to the isomorphism Q : Im Q GF → Im Q.
     Thus, the singular kernel P(0, ∞) represents Q−1 .
Proof. Indeed,
               Z ∞                                         Z ∞                        Z ∞
                         GF − tH                                       GF − tH
                     Q       e        Qα dt = − Q                  Q     e   α dt +         He−tHα dt.
                0                                             0                       0

Since ( Q GF )2 = 0, and α ∈ Im Q GF , the first term on the right hand side is zero. Thus,
                     Z ∞                                          Z ∞
                                     GF − tH                            d −tH
                                 Q     e       Qα dt = −                   e α dt = α − πα
                         0                                         0    dt
where π : E → Ker H is the projection onto the zero eigenspace of H.
  Since Ker H ∩ Im Q GF = 0, and Im Q GF is a direct sum of H eigenspaces, we see
that πα = 0, so that          Z                     ∞
                                                        Q GF e−tH Qα dt = α
                                                0
as desired.                                                                                              

6.6. Functional integrals in terms of differential operators. When M is a point, we
will be able to express certain integrals over the finite dimensional vector space E in
terms of the differential operators on O (E ) introduced above. When dim M > 0,
so that E is infinite dimensional, we will attempt to take this as a definition of the
functional integral.
6.6.1 Definition. Let Φ ∈ Sym2 E be any even element, and S ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]]) be an even
element, which modulo h̄ is at least cubic. Define
                    Γ(Φ, S) = h̄ log (exp(h̄∂Φ ) exp( S/h̄)) ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]]).

   It is easy to check that this expression is well defined. However, if S was not at
least cubic, but contained a quadratic term, this expression would contain some non-
convergent infinite sums.
                      RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                                                    35

                                                                     
  Let us assume for a moment that M is a point. Let Im Q GF R be a real slice of
Im Q GF ⊂ E , with the property that the quadratic form h x, Qxi is negative definite on
 Im Q GF    . Then the integral
          R
                     Z                                            
                                exp 21 h x, Qxi /h̄ + S( x + a)/h̄ dµ
                               x∈(Im Q GF )R

is well defined as a formal series in the variables h̄ and a ∈ E . We use an h̄-dependent
Lebesgue measure dµ normalised so that
                         Z                               
                                      exp 21 h x, Qxi /h̄ dµ = 1.
                                      x∈(Im Q GF )R

6.6.2 Lemma. If M is a point,
                                                     Z                                                                          
                                                                                     1
          Γ( P(0, ∞), S)( a) = h̄ log                                       exp      2 h x, Qxi /h̄ + S ( x + a)/h̄                 dµ .
                                                         x∈(Im Q GF )R


Proof. It suffices to show that for any polynomial f ∈ O (E )
                                                         Z                                             
                                                                                    1
                      exp(h̄∂ P(0,∞) ) f =                                  exp     2 h x, Qxi /h̄         f ( x + a) .
                                                             ( Im Q GF )R
Both sides are functions
                        of a ∈ E .                                      
  Let v ∈ Im Q GF R ⊂ E . Define a linear function lv = ( Qv)∨ on Im Q GF R , so that
                                                             lv ( x) = h x, Qvi .
Then
                                  ∂v h x, Qxi = 2lv ( x).
We can integrate by parts, to find
  Z                                             
                            1
                    exp     2 h x, Qxi /h̄          lv ( x + a) f ( x + a)
      (Im Q GF )R
                                      Z                                                        
                               = h̄                           ∂v exp        1
                                                                            2 h x, Qxi /h̄          f ( x + a)
                                          (Im Q GF )R
                                                                               Z                                            
                                                                                                           1
                                                                   + lv ( a)                     exp       2 h x, Qxi /h̄       f ( x + a))
                                                                                   (Im Q GF )R
                                           Z                                               
                               = −h̄                             exp    1
                                                                        2 h x, Qxi /h̄         ∂v f ( x + a)
                                               ( Im Q GF )   R
                                                                               Z                                            
                                                                                                           1
                                                                   + lv ( a)                     exp       2 h x, Qxi /h̄       f ( x + a))
                                                                                   (Im Q GF )R

A similar identity holds for exp(h̄∂ P(0,∞) ) f , namely
                exp(h̄∂ P(0,∞) )lv f = −h̄ exp(h̄∂ P(0,∞) )∂v f + lv ( a) exp (h̄∂ P(0,∞) ) f .
This follows from the equation
                          [∂ P(0,∞) , lv ] = [∂ P(0,∞) , ( Qv)∨ ] = −∂ P(0,∞)⋆( Qv) = −∂v .
The last equation holds because P(0, ∞)⋆ is the operator Q−1 : Im Q → Im Q GF .
36                                                    KEVIN COSTELLO


  These identities allow us to use induction to reduce to the case when f is constant.
The normalisation in the measure on Im Q GF R takes care of this initial case.
                                                                                     

                                                 7. R EGULARISATION
7.1. Regularisation. One can write the formal equality
                   Z
          h̄ log                         exp( 21 he, Qei /h̄ + S(e + a)/h̄ ) = lim Γ( P(ε, ∞), S)
                       e ∈( Im Q GF )R                                                  ε→0

where as above,
                                                                             
                           Γ( P(ε, ∞), S) = h̄ log exp(h̄∂ P(ε,∞) ) exp( S/h̄) .

When dim M = 0, this equality was proved in Lemma 6.6.2. When dim M > 0, we
will take this equality as an attempt to define the functional integral over (Im Q GF )R .
   When dim M > 0, although the expression Γ( P(ε, ∞), S) is well defined for all
ε > 0, the limit limε→0 Γ( P(ε, ∞), S) is divergent. This is because P(0, ∞) is a distribu-
tional section of the vector bundle E ⊠ E on M 2 , with singularities on the diagonal. The
expression exp(h̄∂ P(0,∞) ) exp( S/h̄) involves multiplication of the distribution P(0, ∞)
with distributions with support along the diagonal. In other words, it involves inte-
grals over products of M where the integrand has singularities on the diagonal. This
is the problem of ultraviolet singularities.
   As I explained in the introduction, we will renormalise the limit by subtracting
certain counter-terms from the action S. In order to do this, we need some control
over the small ε asymptotics of Γ( P(ε, ∞), S).
   Let us write
                          Γ( P(ε, T ), S) = ∑ h̄i Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S)
                                                           i≥ 0,k≥ 0

where Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) is homogeneous of order k as a formal functional of e ∈ E . This
expression is the Taylor expansion of Γ in the variables h̄ and e ∈ E .
  We will construct a small ε asymptotic expansion for each Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S). This ex-
pansion will take values in a certain subalgebra A of the algebra of analytic functions
on ε ∈ (0, ∞).
7.1.1 Definition. Let A ⊂ C ∞ ((0, ∞)) be the subalgebra spanned over C by functions of ε
of the form
                                Z
                                             F ( t1 , . . . , tn ) 1/ 2
                        f (ε) =                                         dt1 . . . dtn
                                  U ⊂(ε,1) n G ( t1 , · · · , tn ) 1/ 2
and functions of the form
                                     Z
                                                       F ( t1 , . . . , tn = ε) 1/ 2
                          f (ε) =                                                    dt1 · · · dtn−1
                                         U ⊂(ε,1) n −1 G ( t1 , . . . , tn = ε) 1/ 2

where
   (1) F, G ∈ Z≥0 [t1 , . . . , tn ] \ {0}; n can take on any value.
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                           37


    (2) the region of integration U is an open subset cut out by finitely many equations of the
        form tli > t j , for l ∈ Z.

   “Spanned” means in the non-topological sense; we only allow finite sums. Thus, A
has a countable basis, and every element is written as a finite sum of basis elements.
We give A the trivial topology, where all subspaces are closed.
   The details in the definition of A aren’t all that important; we could always use a
larger algebra containing A .
Theorem A.        (1) For each i and k, there exist functions fr ∈ A , r ∈ Z≥0 , such that there
      is a small ε asymptotic expansion of the form
                         Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S(ε, h̄))(e) ≃ ∑ fr (ε)Φr ( T, e)
                                                         r≥0

        where e ∈ E , and each Φr   is in O (E , C ∞ ((0, ∞))).
    (2) The Φr ( T, e) have a small T asymptotic expansion
                                  Φr ( T, e) = ∑ gq ( T )Ψq,r (e)
        where the Ψq,r ∈ Ol (E ) are local functionals of e, and gq ( T ) are certain smooth func-
        tions of T.
    (3) If k > 0, so Ψq,r is a non-constant function on E , then we can speak of the germ
        of each Ψq,r near a point x ∈ M. This germ only depends on the germ of the data
        ( E, h , i , Q, Q GF , S) near x.
Remark: The last point is a little delicate. For instance, for any t > 0, the germ of the
heat kernel Kt near a point ( x, x) in M 2 depends on the global behaviour of the elliptic
operator H. Only the t → 0 asymptotics of the germ of Kt depends on the germ of H.
   The appendix contains a proof of a more general version of this theorem, as well as
a precise statement of what I mean by small ε asymptotic expansion.

                                    8. R ENORMALISATION
  The next step in constructing the quantum field theory is renormalisation. This
amounts to replacing our action functional S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) by a series
                    S R (h̄, ε) = S(h̄) − SCT (h̄, ε) = S −      ∑         h̄i SCT
                                                                                i,k (ε) .
                                                               i> 0,k≥ 0

The SCT
      i,k are known as counter-terms; they are ε-dependent local functionals on E ,
homogeneous of degree k. This renormalised action functional S R is required to be
such that the ε → 0 limit of Γ( P(ε, T ), S R (ε)) exists. Recall that
                                              Z T
                                 P(ε, T ) =         ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt
                                               ε

so that limε→0 Γ( P(ε, T ), S R (ε)) will be our renormalised effective action.
   In order to perform this renormalisation, we need to pick a renormalisation scheme.
Let A≥0 ⊂ A be the subspace of those functions f such that limε→0 f exists.
38                                        KEVIN COSTELLO


8.0.2 Definition. A renormalisation scheme is a subspace A<0 to A≥0 such that
                                        A = A< 0 ⊕ A≥ 0 .

   Note that a renormalisation scheme exists, simply because A is a vector space with
a countable basis.
   The choice of a renormalisation scheme allows us to extract the singular part of
functions f ∈ A . The singular part of f is simply the projection of f onto A<0 .
Theorem B. Let S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) be an even functional which, modulo h̄, is at least cubic.
Then there exists a unique series
                                   SCT (ε, h̄ ) =       ∑ h̄i SCT
                                                               i,k ( s)
                                                     i≥ 1,k≥ 0

such that
     (1) each SCTi,k (ε) is an element of Ol (E , A< 0 ) which is homogeneous of degree k as a func-
          tion on E ;
     (2) the limit limε→0 Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT ) exists.
   If k > 0, the germ of the counter-term SCT    i,k at x ∈ M depends only on the germ of the data
                  GF
( E, h , i , Q, Q , S) near x.
     We use the notation
                           Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) = lim Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT ).
                                               ε→0

Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S) is a renormalised functional integral.
Proof. Before I begin the proof, let us introduce some notation. Let us give the set
Z≥0 × Z≥0 the lexicographic ordering, so that (i, k) < (i′ , k′ ) if i < i′ , or if i = i′ and
k < k′ .
  Let A ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]]) be any (not necessarily local) functional. As before, we will
write
                                      A = ∑ h̄i Ai,k
where Ai,k ∈ O (E ) is a homogeneous functional of degree k. Let us write
                                    A≤( I,K) =          ∑            h̄i Ai,k .
                                                 ( i,k)≤( I,K )

  The proof of this theorem is actually very simple; no graph combinatorics are re-
quired. All we need to do is to construct the SCT
                                               i,k inductively using the lexicographic
ordering on Z≥0 × Z≥0 .
  So, let us suppose, by induction, that we have constructed
                              SCT
                               i,k (ε, T ) ∈ Ol (E , A< 0 ⊗ C (R> 0 ))
                                                             ∞

for all (i, k) < ( I, K ), which are homogeneous of degree k as a function of α ∈ E . Here,
R>0 has coordinate T.
   Let
                                    SCT
                                      <( I,K ) = ∑ h̄i SCT
                                                        i,k
                                                    ( i,k)<( I,K )
                   RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                     39


We can write

                                     <( I,K ) ) = ∑ h̄ Γi,k ( P (ε, T ) , S − S <( I,K ) )
                                                      i
                   Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT                                         CT

                                                     i,k≥ 0

Let us make the following further induction assumptions :
    (1) the limit limε→0 Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT
                                               <( I,K )
                                                        ) exists, for all (i, k) < ( I, K ).
    (2) each SCT
              i,k is independent of T if (i, k) < ( I, K ).
   Now simply let

                        SCT                                               CT
                         I,K = Singular part of Γ I,K ( P (ε, T ) , S − S <( I,K ) ) .

By “singular part” I mean the following. We take the small ε expansion of the right
hand side, of the form ∑ fr (ε)Φ( T, a) where f r (ε) ∈ A . The singular part is obtained
by replacing each fr by its projection onto A<0 .
  Note that

         Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT          CT                                CT                      CT
                               <( I,K ) − S I,K ) = Γi,k ( P (ε, T ) , S − S <( I,K ) ) − δi,I δk,K S I,K

if (i, k) ≤ ( I, K ). It follows that Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT
                                                            <( I,K )
                                                                     − SCT
                                                                        I,K ) is non-singular (i.e. has
a well-defined ε → 0 limit) if (i, k) ≤ ( I, K ).
   To prove the result, it remains to prove the following.
    (1) SCT
          I,K is independent of T.
         CT
    (2) S I,K is a local functional.
    (3) SCT
         0,K = 0 (that is, there are no tree-level counter-terms).

8.0.3 Lemma. SCT
              I,K is independent of T.

Proof. Observe that
                                                                  Z T′
                      P(ε, T ′ ) − P(ε, T ) = P( T, T ′ ) =              ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt
                                                                   T

is in E ⊗ E (that is, it has no singularities). Let

                                     A(ε, h̄) ∈ O (E , A≥0 ⊗ C[[h̄ ]])

be any (not necessarily local) functional. Non-singularity of P( T, T ′ ) implies that

                                        Γ≤( I,K) ( P( T, T ′ ), A(ε, h̄))

is non-singular (i.e., has a well-defined ε → 0 limit).
   We know by induction that Γ≤( I,K) ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT   ≤( I,K )
                                                                     (ε, T )) is non-singular. It fol-
lows that
                                                                                  
                 Γ≤( I,K) P( T, T ′ ), Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ), S − SCT ≤( I,K ) (ε , T )
40                                                KEVIN COSTELLO


is non-singular. But,
                                                                 
   Γ≤( I,K) P( T, T ′ ), Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ), S − SCT
                                                 ≤( I,K ) (ε , T )
                                                                                       
                                        = Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ′ ), S − SCT≤( I,K ) (ε , T )
                                                                                         
                                        = Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ′ ), S − SCT<( I,K ) (ε , T ′
                                                                                        )   − SCT
                                                                                               ( I,K ) (ε, T )

(where we are using the induction assumption that SCT             <( I,K )
                                                                           (ε, T ′ ) = SCT  <( I,K )
                                                                                                     (ε, T )).
  This makes it clear that
                                                                                                    
                                                                    ′                            ′
         SCT
          ( I,K ) (ε , T ) = Singular part of Γ ≤( I,K )   P (ε , T   ) , S −  S CT
                                                                                 <( I,K ) (ε , T   )
                                             ′
                             = SCT
                                ( I,K ) (ε, T )

as desired.                                                                                                      
8.0.4 Lemma. SCT
              I,K is local, so that

                                             SCT
                                              I,K ∈ Ol (E , A< 0 ) .

Proof. This follows immediately from the fact that SCT
                                                    I,K is independent of T, and from
the T → 0 asymptotic expansion of the singular part of Γ I,K ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT
                                                                               <( I,K ) )
proved in theorem A.                                                                 
8.0.5 Lemma. SCT
              0,k = 0.

Proof. All we need to show is that Γ0,k ( P(ε, T ), S) is regular, for all k. This is an easy
corollary of Lemma 4.2.3. Namely, if we write S = ∑ h̄i Si,k as usual, then Lemma 4.2.3
implies that the functionals S0,k are of the form
                                           D                E
                               S0,k (α ) = Ψk (α ⊗k−1 ), α
for some polydifferential operator
                                               Ψ k : E ⊗ k− 1 → E
and α ∈ E . The tree-level terms Γ0,k ( P(ε, T ), S) of Γ( P(ε, T ), S) are obtained by com-
posing these polydifferential operators Ψk with each other and with the operator
                                               P(ε, T ) : E → E
constructed by convolution with the kernel P(ε, T ). Note that
                                                         Z T
                                       P(ε, T ) ⋆ α =          Q GF e−tHα
                                                           ε
                                                                            R
This operator is a map E → E , even when ε = 0. That is, 0T e−tH takes smooth sections
of the vector bundle E on M to smooth sections of E. This implies that all tree-level
operators are non-singular, as desired.                                             
     This completes the proof.                                                                                   
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                41


        9. R ENORMALISATION GROUP FLOW AND CONVERSE TO THEOREM B
  Let S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄ ]] be a local functional. The expression Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) constructed
using theorem B should be interpreted as the scale T renormalised effective action.
9.0.6 Lemma. The renormalisation group equation holds:
                        Γ R ( P(0, T ′ ), S) = Γ( P( T, T ′ ), Γ R ( P(0, T ), S)).
Proof. This follows from the fact that the counter-terms SCT
                                                          i,k are independent of T, and
the identity
                  Γ( P( T, T ′ ), Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT )) = Γ( P(ε, T ′ ), S − SCT ).
                                                                                                      
   Thus we have seen that to any local functional S ∈ O (E )[[h̄]], we can associate a sys-
tem of effective actions Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) satisfying the renormalisation group equation.
In a moment we will see that a converse holds: all such systems of effective actions
satisfying a certain locality condition arise in this way.
9.0.7 Definition. A system of effective actions on the space of fields E is given by an
effective action
                                    Se f f ( T ) ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]])
for each T ∈ R>0 , which are all at least cubic modulo h̄, and such that
     (1) The renormalisation group equation is satisfied,
                               Se f f ( T2 ) = Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), Se f f ( T1 )).
    (2) As T → 0, Se f f ( T ) must become local, in the following sense. There must exist some
        T-dependent local functional
                                 Φ ∈ Ol (E , C ∞ (0, ∞) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]])
        where T is the coordinate on (0, ∞), such that
                                                        
                                lim Se f f ( T ) − Φ( T ) = 0.
                                   T →0

        (The T → 0 limit of Se f f ( T ) itself will generally not exist).

  The effective actions defined by Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) for S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) satisfy these
axioms.
  Fix any renormalisation scheme A<0 . Then theorem B provides a map
   S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄ ]] which is at least cubic modulo h̄ → systems of effective actions
                                                               S 7→ {Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) | T ∈ R>0 }
Theorem C. For any renormalisation scheme A<0 , this map is a bijection.
   This set of systems of effective actions is a canonical object associated to (E , Q, Q GF ),
independent of the choice of renormalisation scheme. Renormalisation and regu-
larisation techniques other than those considered should lead to different ways of
42                                                   KEVIN COSTELLO


parametrising the same set of systems of effective actions. For instance, if one could
make sense of dimensional regularisation on general manifolds, one would hope to
get simply a different parametrisation of this set.
   From this point of view, the formalism of counter-terms is simply a convenient way
to describe this set of systems of effective actions. The counter-terms themselves, and
the original action S, are not really meaningful in themselves.

Proof of theorem C. The proof is very simple. Let { Se f f ( T )} be a system of effective
actions. We want to construct a corresponding local functional S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄]] such
that
                                             Se f f ( T ) = Γ R ( P(0, T ), S).

Suppose, by induction, that we have constructed S<( I,K) such that

                                       ef f
                                     S(i,k) ( T ) = Γ(Ri,k) ( P(0, T ), S<( I,K) )

                                                                                                       ef f
for all (i, k) < ( I, K ). The initial case is when i = 0 and k = 2. Then, S(0,2) ( T ) = 0 =
S(0,2) , so the identity automatically holds.
   Assume ( I, K ) ≥ (0, 3). The renormalisation group equation says that
 ef f                                 ef f
S( I,K) ( T ) = Γ( I,K) ( P(ε, T ), S≤( I,K) (ε))
                 ef f                                   ef f
            = S( I,K) (ε) + Γ( I,K) ( P(ε, T ), S<( I,K) (ε))
                 ef f                            R
            = S( I,K) (ε) + Γ( I,K) ( P(ε, T ), Γ<( I,K ) ( P ( 0, ε) , S <( I,K ) ))
                 ef f                            R                                        R
            = S( I,K) (ε) + Γ( I,K) ( P(ε, T ), Γ≤( I,K ) ( P ( 0, ε) , S <( I,K ) )) − Γ ( I,K ) ( P ( 0, ε) , S <( I,K ) ))
                 ef f
            = S( I,K) (ε) + Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, T ), S<( I,K) )) − Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) )).

The left hand side is independent of ε, so the right hand side is also. Thus,
                                      ef f
                                    S( I,K) (ε) − Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) ))

is independent of ε. This allows us to define
                                              ef f
                              S( I,K) = S( I,K) (ε) − Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) )).

With this definition, we automatically have
                                       ef f
                                     S( I,K) ( T ) = Γ R ( P(0, T ), S≤( I,K) ).

It remains to show that S( I,K) is local. This is an immediate consequence of the local-
ity axiom for Se f f (ε). There exists Φ(ε), an ε dependent local functional, such that
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                        43


limε→0 Se f f (ε) − Φ(ε) = 0. Thus,
                    ef f
        S( I,K) = S( I,K) (ε) − Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) ))
                    ef f
               = S( I,K) (ε) − Φ(ε) + Φ(ε) − Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) ))
                                                                                 
                           ef f
               = lim S( I,K) (ε) − Φ(ε) + lim Φ(ε) − Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) ))
                 ε→0                         ε→0
                                                         
                                 R
               = lim Φ(ε) − Γ( I,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) )) .
                  ε→0

This last quantity is local, because Φ(ε) is local and Γ(RI,K) ( P(0, ε), S<( I,K) ) has a small
ε asymptotic expansion in terms of local functionals.
                                                                                              
   As I explained in the introduction, this result elucidates how the renormalisation
procedure depends on the choice of renormalisation scheme. For the rest of the paper,
we will fix one renormalisation scheme A<0 . When we talk about local functionals,
we are in some sense really talking about systems of effective actions, but using our
fixed renormalisation scheme to identify these two sets. Thus, as long as all the state-
ments we make are about the effective action Γ R ( P(0, T ), S), and not directly about the
local functional S, everything we do is independent of the choice of renormalisation
scheme.

                              10. Q UANTUM MASTER EQUATION
10.1. Quantum master equation in finite dimensions. Recall that to each element
Φ ∈ Sym2 E we have associated (in section 6) an order two differential operator ∂Φ
on O (E ). Let
                                 ∆ T = − ∂ KT .
When T > 0, this is a differential operator on O (E ). When T = 0, because K0 is no
longer an element of Sym2 E but of some distributional completion, the operator ∆0
is ill-defined. The operators ∆ T are odd, second-order differential operators on O (E ),
which satisfy the equation
                                        ∆2T = 0.
Thus, each ∆ T endows the algebra O (E ) with the structure of a Batalin-Vilkovisky
algebra. The ill-defined operator ∆0 is the “physical” Batalin-Vilkovisky operator.
   Let us assume for a moment that M is a point, so that E is simply a finite dimen-
sional super vector space. Then, the operator ∆0 is perfectly well defined. In this
situation, ∆0 is the Batalin-Vilkovisky odd Laplacian, as described in section 2. The
operator K0 is simply the kernel representing the identity map on E . In terms of a
Darboux basis xi , ξi of V, where xi are even, ξi are odd, and h xi , ξi i = δi j , then
                                   K0 = − ∑ ( x i ⊗ ξ i + ξ i ⊗ x i )
                                              i

and
                                      ∆0 = −∂K0 = ∑ ∂ xi ∂ξi .
44                                               KEVIN COSTELLO


  Still in the situation when dim M = 0, the Poisson bracket on the algebra O (E ) can
be written in terms of ∆0 , using the equation
                        { f , g} = ∆0 ( f g) − ∆0 ( f ) g − (−1)| f | f ∆0 ( g).
When dim M > 0, this Poisson bracket is ill-defined on O (E ). However, as we have
seen, the Poisson bracket of an element of Ol (E ) with an element of O (E ) is well-
defined.
  A functional S ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]]) satisfies the BV quantum master equation if
                                       ( Q + h̄∆0 ) exp( S/h̄) = 0.
Again, this makes sense when dim M = 0, but the left hand side of this equation is
ill-defined when dim M > 0. This equation can be re-expressed as
                                       QS + 21 { S, S} + h̄∆0 S = 0.
10.2. The quantum master equation and the renormalisation group flow. Let us re-
turn to the situation where dim M ≥ 0.
  Recall that                   Z       Z        T                 T
                           P(ε, T ) =                Lt dt =           ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt.
                                             ε                 ε
10.2.1 Lemma.
                                    QPεT = −KT + Kε .
where Q denotes the tensor product differential on E ⊗ E .
Proof. Indeed, our sign conventions are such that QP(ε, T ) is the kernel for the opera-
tor
                                       Z T                         Z T
                                                 GF − tH
                           α 7→ Q            Q        e    α+              Q GF e−tH Qα
                                         ε                             ε
                                  Z T
                              =         He−tHα
                                   ε
                              = −e− T Hα + e−ε Hα .
Thus, the operator associated to QP(ε, T ) is the same as that associated to −KT +
Kε .                                                                             
10.2.2 Lemma. Let S ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]]). Then S satisfies the ∆ T1 quantum master equation
                                       ( Q + h̄∆ T1 ) exp( S/h̄) = 0
if and only if Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), S) satisfies the ∆ T2 quantum master equation
                           ( Q + h̄∆ T2 ) exp(Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), S)/h̄) = 0.


Proof. Indeed,
                    [∂ P( T1 ,T2 ) , Q] = ∂ QP( T1,T2 ) = ∂KT1 − ∂KT2 = ∆ T2 − ∆ T1 .
This implies that
                       [Q, exp(∂ P( T1 ,T2 ) )] = exp(∂ P( T1 ,T2 ) )(∆ T1 − ∆ T2 ).
                   RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                 45


Thus,
        ( Q + h̄∆ T2 ) exp(Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), S)/h̄) = ( Q + h̄∆ T2 ) exp(h̄∂ P( T1 ,T2 ) ) exp( S/h̄)
                                                   = exp(h̄∂ P( T1 ,T2 ) )( Q + h̄∆ T1 ) exp( S/h̄ ).
The converse follows because the operator exp(h̄∂ P( T1 ,T2 ) ) is invertible.
                                                                                                        
   Suppose we have an effective action Se f f ( T1 ) ∈ O (E , C[[h̄ ]]) at scale T1 . Then
Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), Se f f ( T1 )) is the effective action at scale T2 . What we see is that if the
effective action Se f f ( T1 ) satisfies the scale T1 quantum master equation, then the ef-
fective action Se f f ( T2 ) at scale T2 satisfies the scale T2 quantum master equation, and
conversely.
10.3. Renormalised quantum master equation. We know, using the renormalisation
techniques we have discussed so far, how to make sense of the expression Γ( P(0, T ), S)
if S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) is a local functional which is at least cubic modulo h̄. The renor-
malised scale T effective action is
                                                  def
                                Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) = lim Γ( P(ε, T ), S R )
                                                        ε→0

where S R = S − SCT .
  We would like to define a renormalised quantum master equation, which is a re-
placement for the ill-defined equation
                                          ( Q + h̄∆0 )e S/h̄ = 0.
When dim M = 0, so E is finite dimensional, this equation is well-defined and is
equivalent to the equation
                                                            
                       ( Q + h̄∆ T ) exp h̄−1 Γ( P(0, T ), S) = 0.
In the infinite dimensional situation, we will take this second equation as a definition,
where we use the renormalised version Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) of Γ( P(0, T ), S). Thus,
10.3.1 Definition. S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation if
                                                                
                       ( Q + h̄∆ T ) exp h̄ −1 Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) = 0.

   Theorems B and C show that there is a bijection between the set of local func-
tionals S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) and the set of systems of effective actions, sending S to
{Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) | T ∈ R>0 } . The renormalised QME is thus just saying that the scale
T effective action satisfies the scale T QME.
   It is immediate from Lemma 10.2.2 that this condition is independent of T. That
is, if S satisfies the renormalised QME for one value of T, then it does so for all other
values of T.
   It seems to me that a successful quantisation of the quantum field theory with clas-
sical action S0 consists of replacing S0 by a solution S = S0 + ∑i>0 h̄ i Si of the renor-
malised quantum master equation. Equivalently, a quantisation of a classical action S0
46                                         KEVIN COSTELLO


is given by replacing S0 by a system of effective actions { Se f f ( T ) | T ∈ R>0 }, which
satisfy the quantum master equation, and which, modulo h̄, converge to S0 as T → 0.
10.3.2 Lemma. Suppose that S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]]) satisfies the renormalised quantum master
equation. Then
                                       Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S) |Ker H
satisfies the quantum master equation on the finite dimensional vector space
                                        Ker H = H ∗ (E , Q).
Proof. This is immediate from the fact that the heat kernel K∞ is the element of Ker H ⊗
Ker H ⊂ E ⊗ E which (as a kernel on Ker H) represents the identity map Ker H →
Ker H.                                                                                 
     Recall that Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S)( a) is a renormalised version of the functional integral
                                Z                                            
                         h̄ log                  1
                                             exp 2h̄ h x, Qxi + h̄1 S( x + a) .
                              x∈( Im Q GF )R

If we take a to be in Ker H = H ∗ (E , Q), then this functional integral is the Wilsonian
effective action in the Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism, obtained by integrating over a
Lagrangian Im Q GF in the space Im Q GF ⊕ Im Q of positive eigenvalues of the Hamil-
tonian H.

         11. H OMOTOPIES OF SOLUTIONS OF THE QUANTUM MASTER EQUATION
   In the usual finite-dimensional Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism [Sch93, AKSZ97], one
reason the quantum master equation is so important is that it implies that the func-
tional integral is independent of the choice of gauge fixing condition (usually, a La-
grangian or isotropic subspace in the space of fields).
   We would like to prove a version of this in the infinite dimensional situation, for
the renormalised quantum master equation. However, things are more delicate in
this situation; the renormalised QME itself depends on the choice of a gauge fixing
condition. What we will show is that if Q GF (t) is a one-parameter family of gauge
fixing conditions, then the set of homotopy classes of solutions to the renormalised
QME using Q GF (0) is isomorphic to the corresponding set using Q GF (1). This result
is a corollary of a result about certain simplicial sets of gauge fixing conditions and of
solutions to the renormalised QME.
   As I explained earlier, we are fixing a renormalisation scheme throughout the paper,
which allows us to identify the set of local functionals S ∈ Ol (E )[[h̄]] with the set of
systems of effective actions. Everything we say should be in terms of the effective
action Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) and not directly in terms of the local functional S. As long as we
stick to this, everything we do will be independent of the choice of renormalisation
scheme.

11.1. Families and simplicial sets of gauge fixing conditions. Let us denote the n-
simplex by ∆n .
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                         47


11.1.1 Definition. A family of gauge fixing conditions parametrised by ∆n is a first order
differential operator
                         Q GF : E ⊗ C ∞ (∆n ) → E ⊗ C ∞ (∆n )
which is C ∞ (∆n ) linear, and which satisfies a family version of the axioms for a gauge fixing
condition. Namely,
    (1) the operator H0 = [ Q ⊗ 1, Q GF ] must be a smooth family of generalised Laplacians in
        the sense of [BGV92], section 9.5.
    (2) there is a direct sum decomposition (of C ∞ (∆n ) modules)
                     E ⊗ C ∞ (∆n ) = Im ( Q ⊗ 1) ⊕ Im Q GF ⊕ Ker H0 .

  We will normally just write Q for the operator Q ⊗ 1 on E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ), and similarly
we will write d DR for 1 ⊗ d DR . The operator Q GF extends in a unique Ω∗ (∆n )-linear
way to E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ). Let us use the notation
                   H = [ Q + d DR , Q GF ] : E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ) → E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ).
It is easy to see that H is Ω∗ (∆n )-linear. If H1 = [d DR , Q GF ], then H = H0 + H1 and
H1 is an order 1 differential operator. Thus, the symbol of H is the same as that of H0 ,
and, by assumption, the symbol of H0 is given by a smooth family of metrics on M,
times the identity on the vector bundle E on M. Thus, we can think of H as a smooth
family of generalised Laplacians on E parametrised by the supermanifold ∆n × R0,n .
The results of [BGV92] imply that there exists a unique heat kernel for H,
                                   Kt ∈ E ⊗ E ⊗ Ω ∗ ( ∆ n ) .
   Let us denote by GF[n] the set of families of gauge fixing conditions parametrised
by ∆n . If φ : ∆n → ∆m is a smooth map (for instance, the inclusion of a face) then there
is an induced map φ∗ : GF[m] → GF[n]. In this way, the sets GF[n] form a simplicial
set, which we denote GF.

11.2. Simplicial sets of solutions to the renormalised QME. Let
                                   S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄]])
be a family of functionals on E , which, as always, is at least cubic modulo h̄. As before,
if P ∈ E ⊗ E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ), one can define
               Γ( P, S) = h̄ log (exp(h̄∂ P ) exp( S/h̄)) ∈ O (E , Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄]]).
  Let us suppose, as above, that we have a smooth family of gauge fixing conditions
Q GF parametrised by ∆n . Let H and K t be as above. This allows us to construct the
propagator we use,
                                             Z T
                                P(ε, T ) =         ( Q GF ⊗ 1)Kt dt.
                                              ε
Thus, one can define the family version of the renormalisation group flow, which
sends
            f ∈ O (E , Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄ ]]) → Γ( P(ε, T ), f ) ∈ O (E , Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄ ]]).
48                                           KEVIN COSTELLO


11.2.1 Definition. A family of systems of effective actions on E parametrised by the super-
manifold ∆n × R0,n is given by an effective action
                                   Se f f ( T ) ∈ O (E , Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄]])
for all T ∈ R>0 , such that
     (1) The renormalisation group equation is satisfied,
                                Se f f ( T2 ) = Γ( P( T1 , T2 ), Se f f ( T1 )).
     (2) As T → 0, Se f f ( T ) must become local, in the following sense. There must exist some
         T-dependent local functional
                           Φ ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C ∞ (0, ∞) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]])
         where T is the coordinate on (0, ∞), such that
                                                         
                                 lim Se f f ( T ) − Φ( T ) = 0.
                                   T →0

         (The T → 0 limit of Se f f ( T ) itself will generally not exist).

  Theorems A, B and C apply in this situation. Indeed, theorem A is stated and
proved in this generality in the appendix, and the proofs of the family version of the-
orems B and C is identical to the proof we gave earlier. Thus, we can define
           Γ R ( P(0, T ), S) = lim Γ( P(ε, T ), S − SCT ) ∈ O (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]).
                                ε→0

This map gives us a bijection between the set of local functionals S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗
C[[h̄ ]]), and the set of families of systems of effective actions parametrised by ∆n ×
R0,n . This bijection depends on the choice of renormalisation scheme, which we fix
throughout the paper.
   We say that S satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation if
                        (d DR + Q + h̄∆ T ) exp(h̄−1 Γ R ( P(0, T ), S)) = 0.
This condition, as before, is independent of T.
11.2.2 Definition. Define a simplicial set BVE by saying that BVE [n] is the set of triples
   (1) Q GF ∈ GF[n]
   (2) S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄ ]]) which is at least cubic modulo h̄, and which satisfies the
        renormalised quantum master equation corresponding to Q GF .
  Similarly, define a simplicial set BV H ∗ (E ,Q), by saying BV H ∗ (E ,Q) [n] is the set of functions
S ∈ O ( H ∗ (E , Q)) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n )[[h̄ ]] which satisfy the quantum master equation
                                    (d DR + h̄∆ H ∗ (E ,Q) )e S/h̄ = 0.

  An equivalent (and more natural) definition of the simplicial set BVE would be to
say that BVE [n] is the set of families of systems of effective actions, parametrised by
∆n × R0,n , such that the scale T effective action Se f f ( T ) satisfies the scale T QME,
                                                             e f f ( T )/h̄
                                 ( Q + d DR + h̄∆ T )e S                      = 0.
                   RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                        49


Of course, the choice of renormalisation scheme (which we are fixing throughout the
paper) leads to an equivalence between the two definitions.
11.2.3 Lemma. There is a map
                                        BVE [n] → BV H ∗ (E ,Q) [n]
of simplicial sets, which sends
                                     S 7→ Γ R ( P(0, ∞), S) | H ∗ (E ,Q) .
This extends to a map of simplicial sets
                                        BVE [n] → BV H ∗ (E ,Q) [n]
in the natural way.
11.3. Fibration property. Let Q GF be a gauge fixing condition on E . Let BVE ,QGF
denote the simplicial set of solutions to the renormalised quantum master equation
with fixed gauge fixing condition Q GF . In other words, BVE ,QGF is the fibre of BV over
the point Q GF ∈ GF[0], under the natural map BVE → GF.
   The set π0 BVE ,QGF is the set of homotopy classes of solutions to the renormalised
quantum master equation. The fact that the map BVE ,QGF → BV H ∗ (E ,Q) is a map of
simplicial sets tells us that there is an induced map
                                                         
(†)                          π0 BVE ,QGF → π0 BV H ∗ (E ,Q) .

We would like to show that the set π0 (BVE ,QGF ), and the map (†), are in some sense
independent of Q GF .. This will follow from an abstract result.
11.3.1 Theorem. The map
                                                BVE → GF
is a fibration of simplicial sets.
   We will prove this later.
11.3.2 Corollary. Let Q GF (t) is a smooth families of gauge fixing conditions parametrised by
[0, 1]. Then the sets π0 (BVE ,QGF (0) ), π0 (BVE ,QGF (1) ) are canonically isomorphic. Further,
the diagram
                                                                      
                          π0 BVE ,QGF (0)           // π0 BV       GF
                                                               E ,Q ( 1)
                                                            nn
                                                       nnnnn
                                                      n
                                                 nnn
                                                vvn
                                
                             π0 BV H ∗ (E ,Q)

commutes.
Proof. This follows immediately from the path and homotopy lifting properties for
fibrations of simplicial sets.                                                 
50                                             KEVIN COSTELLO


 12. A LOCAL OBSTRUCTION TO SOLVING THE RENORMALISED QUANTUM MASTER
                                                    EQUATION

   We will prove Theorem 11.3.1 using obstruction theory. In this section we will con-
struct the required obstructions to solving the renormalised QME.
   Let us fix a smooth family Q GF of gauge fixing conditions parametrised by ∆n . Let
S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) be, as always, at least cubic modulo h̄. One way to write
the renormalised quantum master equation for S is the equation
                       lim ( Q + d DR + ∆ T ) exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T ) ) exp( S R /h̄ ) = 0.
                       ε→0
   One can re-express this using the following identity:
                                                   
(12.0.1) Γ P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R =
                                                                                             
                            h̄ log (1 + δ Q + δd DR + δ∆ T ) exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T ) ) exp( S R /h̄ )
where δ is an odd parameter. This identity is a corollary of the fact that
                                     [∂ P(ε,T ) , Q + d DR ] = ∆ T − ∆ε .
Thus, we have an equivalent expression of the renormalised quantum master equa-
tion; the renormalised QME holds if and only if
                     d D                                            E
(†)             lim      Γ P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R    = 0.
                ε→0 dδ
   Recall that our choice of renormalisation scheme gives us a subspace
                                                  A< 0 ⊂ A
which is complementary to the subspace A≥0 . Let
                                          A≤ 0 = A< 0 ⊕ C ⊂ A .
If we denote by A>0 the space of functions whose ε → 0 limit exists and is equal to
zero, we have a direct sum decomposition
                                             A = A≤ 0 ⊕ A> 0 .
12.0.3 Proposition.        (1) Let S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) be an even element. Then
        there exists a unique odd element
                               O( S) ∈ Ol (E , A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]])
         such that
                       d D                                                     E
               lim         Γ P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R + δO( S)
                ε→0 dδ
         exists, and has value 0.
     (2) O( I,K) ( S) depends only on S≤( I,K) , and
          O( I,K) ( S<( I,K) + h̄ I S( I,K) ) = h̄ I QS( I,K) + h̄ I d DR S( I,K) + O( I,K) ( S<( I,K) ).
     (3) Further, if k > 0, the germ of Oi,k ( S) at x ∈ M depends only on the germ of the data
         (E , h , i , Q, Q GF , { Si,k | k > 0}) near x × ∆n .
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                       51


  Thus, S satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation if and only if O( S) = 0.
Proof. The proof is very similar to that of theorem B.
   Suppose we’ve constructed O(i,k) ( S) ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ A≤0 ) for all (i, k) < ( I, K ),
which are independent of T, and which are such that
           d D                                                                     E
                Γ<( I,K) P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R + δO<( I,K) ( S)
           dδ
is regular at ε = 0 with value 0.
   Define

  O( I,K) ( S, T ) = −projection onto A≤0 of
                      d D                                                                     E
                          Γ( I,K) P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R + δO<( I,K) ( S) .
                      dδ
The second clause of the proposition is immediate from this definition. What remains
to be shown is that O( I,K) ( S, T ) is independent of T, and so (by the same argument as
in the proof of theorem B) local.
   It follows from the definition of O( I,K) ( S, T ) that
                                                                                                  
  lim Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R + δO<( I,K) ( S) + h̄ I δO( I,K) ( S, T )
  ε→0
exists, and this limit is independent of δ. Thus, the same holds for
                               
  Γ≤( I,K) P( T, T ′ ), Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R δd DR S R
                                                                                                    
                                                         +δO<( I,K) ( S) + h̄ I δO( I,K) ( S, T )        .

  Observe that
                               
  Γ≤( I,K) P( T, T ′ ), Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R
                                                                                                     
                                                          +δO<( I,K) ( S) + h̄ I δO( I,K) ( S, T )
                                
                      = Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ′ ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R
                                                                                                       
                                                           +δO<( I,K) ( S)) + h̄ I δO( I,K) ( S, T )
                                
                      = Γ≤( I,K) P(ε, T ′ ) + δ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R
                                                                         
                                                          +δO<( I,K) ( S) + h̄ I δO( I,K) ( S, T ).
As we have seen, the first line in this expression has an ε → 0 limit which is inde-
pendent of δ. The same is therefore true for the last line; it follows that O( I,K) ( S, T ) =
O( I,K) ( S, T ′ ), and so O( I,K) ( S) = O( I,K) ( S, T ) is local as desired.
                                                                                             
  We would like to use an inductive, term-by-term method to construct solutions to
the renormalised QME. The following lemma allows us to do so.
52                                          KEVIN COSTELLO


12.0.4 Lemma. Let S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) be a local action functional such that
O<( I,K) ( S) = 0. (In other words, S satisfies the QME up to order ( I, K )). Then:
      (1)
                                             lim O( I,K) ( S)
                                             ε→0
            exists. This implies that O( I,K) ( S) is independent of ε, and so is an element
                                     O( I,K) ( S) ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )).
      (2)
                                       ( Q + d DR )O( I,K) ( S) = 0.

Remark: This lemma implies that if S solves the < ( I, K ) renormalised QME, that is,
O<( I,K) ( S) = 0, then lifting S to a solution to the ≤ ( I, K ) renormalised QME amounts
to finding some S′ ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )), homogeneous of degree K as a function on E ,
with ( Q + d DR ) S′ = −O( I,K) ( S). The desired solution of the renormalised QME will
be S + h̄ I S′ .
Proof. By definition,

  O( I,K) ( S) = −projection onto A≤0 of
                     d D                                                                  E
                          Γ( I,K) P(ε, T ) + ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R + δO<( I,K) ( S) .
                    dδ
Equation (12.0.1) says that
                                            
  Γ P(ε, T ) + ∆ε , S R + δ QS R + δd DR S R
                                                                                            
                          = h̄ log (1 + δ Q + δd DR + δ∆ T ) exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T ) ) exp( S R /h̄ ) .

Since O<( I,K) ( S) = 0, it follows that

     O( I,K) ( S) = −projection onto A≤0 of
                                                                                               
                               h̄ log (1 + δ Q + δd DR + δ∆ T ) exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T ) ) exp( S R /h̄ ) .

It follows that the ε → 0 limit of O( I,K) ( S) exists. This implies that O( I,K) ( S) is constant
as a function of ε.
    The equation O<( I,K) ( S) = 0 implies that

     h̄ I O I,K ( S) = −leading term of
                           d D                                                                  E
                       lim     h̄ log (1 + δ Q + δd DR + δ T∆ T ) exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T )) exp( S R /h̄)
                       ε→0 dδ

where “leading term” means the first non-zero term in the expansion labelled by (i, k),
where the (i, k) term, as always, is h̄ i times a homogeneous function of degree k on E .
We use the lexicographical ordering on the labels (i, k).
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                 53


  It follows that

  h̄ I O I,K ( S) = −leading term of
                                                                D                                 E
                                       (δ Q + δd DR + T∆ T ) lim exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T ) ) exp( S R /h̄ )
                                                              ε→0

so that
     h̄ I ( Q + d DR )O I,K ( S) = − leading term of
                                                         D                               E
                               (δ Q + δd DR + T∆ T )2 lim exp(h̄∂ P(ε,T )) exp( S R /h̄)
                                                           ε→0
                             =0
as desired.
                                                                                                      

                              13. P ROOF OF T HEOREM 11.3.1
   Now we can prove Theorem 11.3.1, that the map BVE → GF is a fibration of sim-
plicial sets.

13.1. Preliminary definitions. Sending ∆n to Ω∗ (∆n ) defines a simplicial algebra,
which we denote Ω∗∆ . If X is a simplicial set, let Ω∗ ( X ) denote the space of maps
X → Ω∗∆ of simplicial sets. Concretely, an element of Ω∗ ( X ) is something which as-
signs to an n-simplex of X an element of Ω∗ (∆n ), in a way compatible with the natural
maps between simplices.
   The spaces
                                   Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ))
assemble into a simplicial object in the category of chain complexes, which we denote
Ol (E , Ω∗∆ ). For any simplicial set X, let Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X )) denote the space of maps X →
Ol (E , Ω∗∆ ). More concretely, we can view an element of Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X )) as being an
element of Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )) for each n-simplex of X, compatible with the natural maps
between simplices.
   Earlier we defined a map
               Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) → Ol (E , A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]])
                                           S 7→ O( S).
This gives a map of simplicial sets
                    Ol (E , Ω∗∆ ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) → Ol (E , A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗∆ ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]).
For each X, we get an obstruction map
              O : Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) → Ol (E , A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ ( X ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]).
S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) satisfies the renormalised QME if and only if O( S) = 0.
  BVE is the simplicial set whose n-simplices are elements S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )) such
that O( S) = 0.
54                                      KEVIN COSTELLO


13.1.1 Definition. Let BVE ,≤( I,K) be the simplicial set whose n-simplices are given by pairs

                                              ( Q GF , S)
where Q GF are smooth families of gauge fixing conditions, and
                                      S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ))
is such that S(i,k) = 0 if (i, k) > ( I, K ) and O≤( I,K) ( S) = 0.
   Similarly, define BVE ,<( I,K) to be the simplicial set whose n-simplices are pairs ( Q GF , S)
where Q GF are as before, and S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )) is such that S(i,k) = 0 if (i, k) ≥ ( I, K )
and O<( I,K) ( S) = 0.

  Suppose X is equipped with a map X → GF. Then a lift of this to a map X →
BVE ,≤( I,K) is given by S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X )) such that S>( I,K) = 0 and O≤( I,K) ( S) = 0. A
similar description holds for maps to BVE ,<( I,K) .
  The following lemma is an immediate corollary of Lemma 12.0.4.
13.1.2 Lemma. Let f : X → BVE ,<( I,K) be a map. Then the obstruction O( I,K) ( X ) to
lifting f to a map X → BVE ,≤( I,K) is independent of the parameter ε, and so is an element of
Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X )). This is closed, ( Q + d DR )O( I,K) ( X ) = 0.
    A lift of f to a map X → BVE ,≤( I,K) is given by an element S′ ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ ( X )), homoge-
neous of degree K as a function on E , with
                                 ( Q + d DR ) S′ = −O( I,K) ( X ).
13.2. Completion of proof. Note that BVE ,≤(0,0) is GF. Thus, to prove Theorem
11.3.1, it suffices to show that
13.2.1 Proposition. The map
                                   BVE ,≤( I,K) → BVE ,<( I,K)
is a fibration.
Proof. Let Λn ⊂ ∆n denote an n-horn, obtained by removing any face from ∂∆n . Sup-
pose we have a map Λn → BVE ,≤( I,K) , and an extension of this to a map ∆n →
BVE ,<( I,K). We need to show that there exists a map ∆n → BVE ,≤( I,K) such that the
diagram
                                     Λn               // BVE ,≤( I,K )
                                                           u::
                                                         u
                                                  u
                                              u               
                                        u
                                     ∆n               // BVE ,<( I,K )

commutes. There is an obstruction
                                 O I,K (∆n ) ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )).
to the existence of this lift.
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                          55


  There is a map Λn → BVE ,<( I,K) . The obstruction to the lift of this to a map Λn →
BVE ,≤( I,K) is an element
                             O I,K (Λn ) ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (Λn )).
Because we are given a lift Λn → BVE ,≤( I,K), we are given an element
                                  L I,K (Λn ) ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (Λn )).
such that ( Q + d DR ) L I,K (Λn ) = O I,K (Λn ).
  Under the natural map
                              Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )) → Ol (E , Ω∗ (Λn ))
the restriction of O I,K (∆n ) is O I,K (Λn ).
    The spaces Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )) form a simplicial abelian group. All simplicial groups
are Kan complexes; see [May92]. This implies that this restriction map is surjective. It
is also a quasi-isomorphism. (This argument was explained to me by Ezra Getzler).
    It follows immediately that there exists an L I,K (∆n ) ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n )) which satisfies
( Q + d DR ) L I,K (∆n ) = O I,K (∆n ), and which restricts to L I,K (Λn ). The choice of such an
L I,K (∆n ) is precisely the choice of a lift of ∆n → BVE ,<( I,K) to BVE ,≤( I,K) . The fact that
L I,K (∆n ) restricts to L I,K (Λn ) implies that the above diagram commutes.
                                                                                                

                            14. A LOCAL TO GLOBAL PRINCIPLE
14.1. Simplicial presheaves and the Čech complex. Let sSets denote the category of
simplicial sets. Recall that a simplicial presheaf on a topological space is simply a
presheaf of simplicial sets. Let U be an open cover of M, so that U is a topological
space with a surjective open map U → M which, on every connected component of U,
is an open embedding. Let
                                 Un = U × M · · · × M U
where U appears n + 1 times on the right hand side. As usual, we can associate to U a
simplicial space, whose space of n-simplices is Un .
   Every connected component of Un is an open subset of X. Let G be a simplicial
presheaf on M, and let
                           G (Un ) =                ∏                  G (V ) .
                                       V a connected component of Un

The simplicial sets G (Un ) form a cosimplicial simplicial set. In other words, if ∆ de-
notes the category of totally ordered finite sets, there is a functor
                                         ǦU : ∆ → sSets
                                          ǦU[n] = G (Un )
where [n] ∈ Ob ∆ is the set {0, 1, . . . , n}.
  Next we will define a simplicial set Č (U, G ) which is the Čech complex for the open
cover U, with coefficients in G.
  For any simplicial sets X, Y, let us denote by
                                           Hom∆ ( X, Y )
56                                         KEVIN COSTELLO


the simplicial set of maps X → Y, so that
                             Hom∆ ( X, Y )[n] = Hom( X × ∆n , Y )
     For each face map φ : ∆n−1 → ∆n , there are maps
                               φ∗                             φ∗
        Hom ∆ (∆n , G (Un )) −→ Hom∆ (∆n−1 , G (Un )) ←− Hom∆ (∆n−1 , G (Un−1 )).
The first arrow is simply composition with φ × Id, and the second arrow comes from
the cosimplicial set structure on the simplicial sets G (Un ).
  Let
                            Č (U, G ) ⊂ ∏ Hom∆ (∆n , G (Un ))
                                              n
be the sub-simplicial set of those elements which are compatible with the face maps.
More precisely, an element f ∈ Č(U, G )[m] is a sequence of elements
                                    f n ∈ Hom(∆n × ∆m , G (Un ))
for each n ≥ 0, such that for each face map φ : ∆n−1 → ∆n ,
                        φ∗ f n = φ∗ f n−1 ∈ Hom(∆n−1 × ∆m , G (Un )).
Note that we do not require compatibility with degeneracy maps. The simplicial set
Č (U, G ) is a version of the total complex of the cosimplicial simplicial set defined by
G (Un ) (see [BK72]).
    Similarly, let
                                                  N
                             Č≤ N (U, G ) ⊂ ∏ Hom∆ (∆n , G (Un ))
                                               n=0
be the sub-simplicial set of those elements compatible with face maps ∆n−1 → ∆n , for
all 0 ≤ n ≤ N. Note that
                                Č(U, G ) = lim Č≤ N (U, G )
                                            ←−
                                                      N
    The simplicial set Č(U, G ) is the non-linear Čech complex for the open cover U, with
values in the simplicial presheaf G. As with ordinary Čech cohomology, we will define
the simplicial set of derived global sections of G as a limit over all open covers. That
is, let
                                RΓ( M, G ) = colimU Č(U, G ).
14.1.1 Definition. A simplicial presheaf G is locally fibrant if for there exists an open cover
{Ui } of M, such that for all i and all open sets W ⊂ Ui , G (W ) is a Kan complex (i.e. a fibrant
simplicial set).

   We will now see that our definition of RΓ( M, G ) is well-behaved as long as G is
locally fibrant.
14.1.2 Lemma. If G is locally fibrant, then the map
                                    Č≤ N (U, G ) → Č≤ N −1 (U, G )
is a fibration for sufficiently fine open covers U.
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                         57


Proof. We can assume that G (W ) is fibrant for all open sets W contained inside some
element of the cover U.
   Suppose we have a map ∆n → Č≤ N −1 (U, G ), and a map Λn → Č≤ N (U, G ) lifting the
composition Λn → ∆n → Č≤ N −1 (U, G ). We need to construct a lift ∆n → Č≤ N (U, G ).
   Such a lift is given by a map ∆n → Hom∆ (∆ N , G (U N )), in other words, a map
∆ N × ∆n → G (U N ). This map is known on ∂∆ N × ∆n and on ∆ N × Λn . Indeed, the
definition of Č≤ N (U, G ) implies that for each face ∆ N −1 → ∆ N , this map must restrict
to the given map ∆n → Hom∆ (∆ N −1 , G (U N −1 ). On ∆ N × Λn , this map must restrict
to the given map Λn → Hom∆ (∆ N , G (U N )).
   Thus, we are left with finding an extension of a map
                         (∂∆ N × ∆n ) ∐∂∆ N ×Λn ∆ N × Λn → G (U N )
to a map
                                    ∆ N × ∆ n → G (U N ) .
The map
                       (∂∆ N × ∆n ) ∐∂∆ N ×Λn ∆ N × Λn → ∆ N × ∆n
is a cofibration and a weak equivalence. Since G (U N ) is fibrant, the desired extension
exists.                                                                                 
14.1.3 Lemma. Let G, G ′ be a locally fibrant simplicial presheaves on M, and let U be a
sufficiently fine open cover of M. Let G → G ′ be a map of simplicial presheaves such that the
maps G (Un ) → G ′ (Un ) are all weak equivalence.
   Then the map
                                     Č(U, G ) → Č (U, G ′ )
is a weak equivalence.
Remark: This lemma is standard in the theory of cosimplicial spaces, see [BK72].
Proof. The long exact sequence for the homotopy groups of a fibration implies that the
maps Č≤ N (U, G ) → Č≤ N (U, G ′ ) are weak equivalences for all N. The result follows
easily from this.                                                                      
14.1.4 Lemma. Let G, G ′ be locally fibrant simplicial presheaves on M. Let G → G ′ be a
map of simplicial presheaves such that, for all sufficiently small open balls B in M, the map
G ( B) → G ′ ( B) is a weak equivalence.
   Then the map RΓ( M, G ) → RΓ( M, G ′ ) is a weak equivalence.
Proof. Recall that a good cover of M is a cover all of whose iterated intersections are
open balls. Every cover of M has a refinement by a good cover.
  If U → M is a sufficiently fine good cover, then Č(U, G ) → Č (U, G ′ ) is a weak
equivalence, by the previous lemma.
  The colimit over open covers U we use to define RΓ( M, G ) is a filtered colimit. Ho-
motopy groups commute with filtered colimits. It follows immediately that the map
RΓ( M, G ) → RΓ( M, G ′ ) is a weak equivalence.                                     
14.1.5 Corollary. Let G be a simplicial presheaf such that for all sufficiently small open balls
U in M, G (U ) is contractible. Then RΓ( M, G ) is contractible.
58                                     KEVIN COSTELLO


Proof. The hypothesis, together with Lemma 14.1.3, implies that the map RΓ( M, G ) →
RΓ( M, ∗) is a weak equivalence, where ∗ is the constant simplicial presheaf on M with
value a point. For any open cover U of M, Č(U, ∗) = ∗, so RΓ(U, ∗) = ∗.            
14.2. Simplicial presheaf of gauge fixing conditions. In order to construct a simpli-
cial presheaf of gauge fixing conditions, we need some extra data, which is typically
present in applications.
   The extra data consists of:
    (1) A smooth, locally trivial fibre bundle F over M, whose fibres are diffeomorphic
        to Rk for some k.
    (2) A map D : F → Diff ≤1 ( E) of fibre bundles over M.
    (3) If f : U → F |U is any local section, defined over some open set U in M, then
                                D ( f ) : Γc (U, E) → Γc (U, E)
         must be an odd operator of square zero, which is self adjoint with respect to the
         symplectic pairing, and which is such that [ Q, D ( f )] is a generalised Laplacian.
         Here Γc denotes sections with compact support.
     (4) If f : M → F is a global section of F, then D ( f ) satisfies the axioms of a gauge
         fixing condition: in addition to the properties already mentioned, this means
         that there is a direct sum decomposition
                    E = Γ( M, E) = Im Q ⊕ Ker[ D ( f ), Q] ⊕ Im D ( f ).
   It is a little ad hoc to require the existence of such a bundle F. It would be better to
construct a bundle of local gauge fixing conditions directly from the data (E , Q, h , i).
However, I couldn’t see a clean way of doing this. In all examples, one is naturally
given an F satisfying these properties.
   For example, in Chern-Simons theory, F will be the bundle of metrics on the tangent
bundle of M. This satisfies these conditions. Once we fix some metric, we can identify
the fibre of the bundle of metrics on the tangent bundle is GL(n)/ SO(n), which is
diffeomorphic to Rn(n+1)/2.
   Associated to the bundle F we have a simplicial presheaf F on M, such that
                   F(U )[n] = smooth sections of F |U × ∆n → U × ∆n .
There is a map
                                    Γ( M, F) → GF.
The simplicial presheaf F has the following properties.
14.2.1 Lemma.        (1) F is locally fibrant.
    (2) Both Γ( M, F) and RΓ( M, F) are contractible.
    (3) The sheaves of sets U 7→ F(U )[n] are soft.
   Recall that a soft sheaf G is one such that for all closed sets C ⊂ M, the map G ( M ) →
G (C ) is surjective.
Proof. I will give a proof of the first statement, that F is locally fibrant. The other
assertions are straightforward to prove. It suffices to show that for all open subsets
U ⊂ M on which the bundle F is trivial, the simplicial set F(U ) is fibrant.
                 RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                       59


  Trivialising F on U gives a diffeomorphism F |U ∼  = U × Rk . Thus, the simplicial
presheaf F is isomorphic to the simplicial presheaf whose n-simplices, on an open set
U, are smooth maps U × ∆n → Rk . Therefore the simplicial set F(U ) admits the struc-
ture of simplicial abelian groups. All simplicial abelian groups are Kan complexes,
thus F(U ) is a Kan complex.
                                                                                   

14.3. The sheaf of local functionals. We want to talk about sheaves of solutions to the
renormalised quantum master equation. In order to do this, we need to first define
sheaves of local functionals. Throughout this section, we will work with functions
modulo constants.
14.3.1 Definition. Let O ( E) denote the presheaf on M whose value on an open set U is
                         Γ(U, O ( E)) = ∏ Hom(Γc (U, E)⊗n , C) Sn .
                                          n≥1

Here, we work with functions modulo constants, so we take n ≥ 1. Hom denotes continuous
linear maps, the subscript Sn denotes coinvariants, and the subscript c denotes sections with
compact support.

  Thus,
                                    Γ( M, O ( E)) = O (E )/C.
In a similar way, if X is an auxiliary manifold, there is a presheaf O ( E, C ∞ ( X )) on M,
such that
                Γ(U, O ( E, C ∞ ( X )) = ∏ Hom(Γc (U, E)⊗n , C ∞ ( X )) Sn .
                                           n≥1

  Recall that polydifferential operators E ⊗n → Densities ( M ) can be identified with
global sections of the infinite rank vector bundle
                                 Diff ( E, C)⊗n ⊗ Densities ( M )
on M. Here C denotes the trivial bundle, Diff is the sheaf of differential operators
between two vector bundles, and tensor products are fibrewise tensor products of
vector bundles.
14.3.2 Definition. Let Ol ( E) ⊂ O ( E) be the sub-presheaf given locally by the image of
                                                  R

       ∏ Γ(U, Diff(E, C)    ⊗n
                                                 → ∏ Hom(Γc (U, E)⊗n , C ∞ ( X )) Sn .
                                 ⊗ Densities M ) −
       n≥1                                            n≥1

  Thus,
                                   Γ( M, Ol ( E)) = Ol (E )/C.
In a similar way, we can define the sheaf Ol ( E, C ∞ ( X )) of local functionals with values
in C ∞ ( X ), or in Ω∗ ( X ), if X is an auxiliary manifold (with corners).
14.3.3 Lemma. The presheaf Ol ( E, Ω∗ ( X )) is a soft sheaf.
60                                            KEVIN COSTELLO


14.4. Simplicial presheaf of solutions to the renormalised QME. Proposition 12.0.3
shows that if we have S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]), and a smooth family of gauge
fixing conditions Q GF , parametrised by ∆n , then there are obstructions
                              O( I,K) ( S, Q GF ) ∈ Ol (E , A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ))
to S satisfying the renormalised quantum master equation. These obstructions are ho-
mogeneous of order K; thus, if K > 0, they are elements of Γ( M, Ol ( E, A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ))).
It is easy to see that the O( I,K) , when K > 0, don’t depend on the constant term of S.
Thus, the obstructions give us maps
        global
      O( I,K) : Γ( M, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n]) → Γ( M, Ol ( E, A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ))).

14.4.1 Lemma. For all I ≥ 0, K > 0 and n ≥ 0, there are unique maps of simplicial
presheaves
                 O( I,K) : Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n] → Ol ( E, A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ))
such that the diagram
                                                            global
                                                         O( I,K )
         Γ( M, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n])                  // Γ( M, Ol ( E, A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ))) .


                                                      O( I,K ) (U )                  
         Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n])                   // Γ(U, Ol ( E, A≤0 ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n )))

commutes, for all open sets U ⊂ M.
Proof. The sheaf Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n] is soft. This implies that for all open
sets U ⊂ M, and all sections ( S, f ) ∈ Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n] ), there exists
an open cover of U by sets {Vi }, and global sections ( Si , f i ), such that ( Si , f i ) |Vi =
( S, f ) |Vi .
                                                                           global
   This implies uniqueness. For existence, we need to show that O( I,K) ( Si , f i ) |Vi only
depends on ( Si , f i ) | Vi . This follows from the third clause of Proposition 12.0.3.
                                                                                               
14.4.2 Lemma. Let S ∈ Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n]) be such that O(i,k) ( S) = 0
for all (i, k) < ( I, K ). Then
     (1) O( I,K) ( S) is independent of ε, so it is a section of Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n )).
     (2)
                                     ( Q + d DR )O( I,K) ( S) = 0.
     (3) If S′ ∈ Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n )) is homogeneous of degree K, then
                           O( I,K) ( S + h̄ I S′ ) = O( I,K) ( S) + ( Q + d DR ) S′ .
Proof. The proof is identical to that of Lemma 12.0.4.                                                     
14.4.3 Definition. Let BV be the simplicial presheaf on M such that Γ(U, BV[n]) is the set
of
                     ( S, f ) ∈ Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n])
                   RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                        61


such that
                                          O( I,K) ( S, f ) = 0
for all I ≥ 0, K > 0.
   Let BV≤( I,K) be the simplicial presheaf such that Γ(U, BV[n]) is the set
                         ( S, f ) ∈ Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n])
such that
   (1) S(i,k) = 0 if (i, k) > ( I, K ), where, as usual, S(i,k) is the part homogeneous of degree
        (i, k) as a function of (h̄, e ∈ Γc (U, E)).
   (2) O(i,k) ( S, f ) = 0 for (i, k) ≤ ( I, K ).
   Let BV<( I,K) be the simplicial presheaf such that Γ(U, BV[n]) is the set
                         ( S, f ) ∈ Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ C[[h̄ ]]) × F[n])
such that
   (1) S(i,k) = 0 if (i, k) ≥ ( I, K ).
   (2) O(i,k) ( S, f ) = 0 for (i, k) < ( I, K ).

14.4.4 Lemma. BV is a locally fibrant simplicial presheaf.
Proof. It suffices to show that Γ(U, BV) is a fibrant simplicial set, for all open subsets
U of M on which the bundle F is trivial. Since we know Γ(U, F) is fibrant, it suffices to
show that the map Γ(U, BV) → Γ(U, F) is a fibration. The proof is identical to that of
Theorem 11.3.1.                                                                         
   This implies that our definition of RΓ( M, BV) is well-behaved.
14.4.5 Definition. The operator Q on the sheaf of sections of E is called triangular if E admits
a decomposition as a direct sum of vector bundles
                                      E = E0 ⊕ E1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ En
such that the operator Q takes sections of Ei to sections of ⊕ j>i E j .

Theorem D. Suppose Q is triangular. Then the natural map
                                     Γ( M, BV) → RΓ( M, BV)
is a weak equivalence.
  This theorem I will call the “local to global principle”. This result allows one to
construct global solutions to the quantum master equation from local local solutions.
The local solutions will typically be constructed in explicit model cases, like Rn with
the flat metric, as we will see below for the case of Chern-Simons theory.
14.5. Proof of theorem D. There is a simplicial presheaf on M whose presheaf of n-
simplices is
                                  Γ(U, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n )).
Let us denote this simplicial presheaf by Ol∆ ( E). Note that
                                         BV ⊂ Ol∆ ( E) × F
62                                          KEVIN COSTELLO


is a sub-simplicial presheaf.
14.5.1 Lemma. Let X be a simplicial set, and let S X : X → RΓ( M, BV<( I,K) ) be a map.
Then there is an obstruction
                                  O( S X ) ∈ Hom( X, RΓ( M, Ol∆ ( E)))
which is closed, ( Q + d DR )O( S X ) = 0, and homogeneous of degree K. The simplicial set of
lifts X → RΓ( M, BV≤( I,K) ) is isomorphic to the presheaf of maps S′X : X → RΓ( M, Ol∆ ( E)),
homogeneous of degree K, satisfying
                                        ( Q + d DR ) S′X = O( X ).
Proof. Fix an open cover U of M. First, we will prove the corresponding statement for
lifts of maps
                              S X : X → Č(U, BV<( I,K) ).
Such a map is given by maps
                                   SnX : X × ∆n → Γ(Un , BV<( I,K) )
for all n, which are compatible with the face maps ∆m → ∆n , Um → Un , for m < n.
   The obstructions to lifting SnX to BV≤( I,K) are elements
                               O( S X , Un ) : X × ∆n → Γ(Un , Ol∆ ( E)).
Naturality of these obstructions implies that they fit together into an element
                                    O( S X , U) : X → Č(U, Ol∆ ( E)).
    There is a bijection between lifts of each SnX and ways of making the obstruction
O( S X , Un ) exact. Thus, there is a corresponding bijection between lifts of S X and
ways of making the total obstruction O( S X , U) exact. Of course, the map S′ : X →
Č (U, Ol∆ ( E)) making O( S X , U) exact must be homogeneous of degree K.
    The obstruction O( S X , U) is natural with respect to restrictions to finer open covers
V. Thus, taking the direct limit, we get an element
                  O( S X ) = lim O( S X , U) ∈ lim Č(U, Ol∆ ( E)) = RΓ( M, Ol∆ ( E)).
                             −→                −→
                              U                 U
Again, naturality of the obstruction implies that lifts X → RΓ( M, BF≤( I,K) ) correspond
to ways of making O( S X ) exact.                                                       
14.5.2 Proposition. The map
                               RΓ( M, BV≤( I,K) ) → RΓ( M, BV<( I,K) )
is a fibration.
Proof. The proof is exactly the same as that of Proposition 13.2.1, using the obstruction
to lifting maps to RΓ( M, BV<( I,K) ) to maps to RΓ( M, BV≤( I,K) ),                    
  Now we will prove the theorem by induction. The starting point in the induction is
the statement that the map
                                   Γ( M, BV(0,0) ) → RΓ( M, BV(0,0) )
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                      63


is a weak equivalence. Note that BV(0,0) = F. Lemma 14.2.1 implies that the map
Γ( M, F) → RΓ( M, F) is a weak equivalence.
   We will assume by induction that the map
                           Γ( M, BV<( I,K) ) → RΓ( M, BV<( I,K) )
is a weak equivalence.
   Consider the diagram
                          Γ( M, BV≤( I,K) )             // RΓ( M, BV≤( I,K ) )

                                       π                                 Rπ
                                                                  
                          Γ( M, BV<( I,K) )            // RΓ( M, BV<( I,K ) ).

By Proposition 13.2.1, the map π is a fibration, and we have just seen that Rπ is also
a fibration. By induction, the bottom horizontal arrow is a weak equivalence. By
considering the long exact sequence of homotopy groups of a fibration, it suffices to
show that the fibres of π and of Rπ are weakly homotopy equivalent.
   Thus, fix a base point
                                x0 ∈ Γ( M, BV<( I,K) )[0].
It remains to show that the map
                                       π − 1 ( x 0 ) → Rπ − 1 ( x 0 )
is a weak equivalence.
   There is an obstruction
                                 O( I,K) ( x0 ) ∈ Γ( M, Ol ( E))
to lifting x0 to Γ( M, BV≤( I,K) ). This is a closed element, QO( I,K) ( x0 ) = 0.
   We can identify π −1 ( x0 ) with the simplicial set whose n-simplices are elements of
                      φ ∈ Γ( M, Ol∆ ( E))[n] = Γ( M, Ol ( E, Ω∗ (∆n )))
which are homogeneous of degree K as functionals on Γ( M, E), and which satisfy
                                 ( Q + d DR )φ = O( I,K) ( x0 ).
  Similarly, we can identify Rπ −1 ( x0 ) with the simplicial set whose n-simplices are
                                       φ ∈ RΓ( M, Ol∆ ( E))[n]
which are homogeneous of degree K and satisfy ( Q + d DR )φ = O( I,K) ( x0 ).
14.5.3 Lemma. The natural map of chain complexes
                   (Γ( M, Ol ( E)), Q) → (RΓ( M, Ol∆ ( E))[0], Q + d DR )
is a quasi-isomorphism.
Proof. It suffices to show that for all open covers U of M, the natural map
                    (Γ( M, Ol ( E)), Q) → (Č(U, Ol∆ ( E))[0], Q + d DR )
is an isomorphism.
64                                       KEVIN COSTELLO


    The triangular nature of the differential Q on E implies that the complex of sheaves
Ol ( E) on M admits a grading, labelled by non-negative integers, such that Q is of
strictly negative degree. This grading is inherited by all auxiliary complexes, such as
Č (U, Ol∆ ( E))[0] and Γ( M, Ol ( E)). It follows from a spectral sequence argument that it
suffices to show that the map of complexes

                         (Γ( M, Ol ( E)), 0) → (Č(U, Ol∆ ( E))[0], d DR )

is a quasi-isomorphism, where the complex on the left hand side now has zero differ-
ential.
   The complex Č(U, Ol∆ ( E))[0], with the differential d DR , is quasi-isomorphic to the
ordinary Čech complex with coefficients in sheaf Ol ( E) (with zero differential). This
sheaf is soft. Thus, its Čech cohomology is the same as its global sections, which is the
statement that the map above is a quasi-isomorphism.
                                                                                        
14.5.4 Corollary. π −1 ( x0 ) is empty if and only if Rπ −1 ( x0 ) is empty.
Proof. Indeed, π −1 ( x0 ) is empty if and only if the cohomology class

                                   [φ] ∈ H ∗ (Γ( M, Ol ( E)), Q)

is non-zero, and similarly for Rπ −1 ( x0 ).                                                      

   Let us use the temporary notation Ol,K ( E) ⊂ Ol ( E) for the sub-sheaf of functionals
which are homogeneous of degree K. Also let Ol,K        ∆ ( E ) ⊂ O ∆ ( E ) be the sub-simplicial
                                                                        l
presheaf of Ol∆ ( E) consisting of those functionals which are homogeneous of degree
K. Thus, a section of the presheaf of n-simplices of Ol,K       ∆ ( E ) is given by an element of

Γ(U, Ol,K ( E, Ω∗ (∆n ))). Ol,K
                            ∆ ( E ) is a simplicial presheaf of Z/2-graded complexes, with

differential Q + d DR .
   Let us suppose that π −1 ( x0 ) is non-empty. (Otherwise, we are done, as Rπ −1 ( x0 )
will also be empty). Then by picking a base point in π −1 ( x0 ), we can identify π −1 ( x0 )
with the simplicial set whose n-simplices are closed, even elements of Γ( M, Ol,K       ∆ ( E ))[n ].

Let us denote this simplicial set by Γ( M, Ol,K ∆ ( E )) closed,even.

   By taking the corresponding base point in Rπ −1 ( x0 ), we can identify Rπ −1 ( x0 ) with
the simplicial set whose n-simplices are closed even elements of RΓ( M, Ol,K            ∆ ( E ))[n ].

Let us denote this simplicial set by RΓ( M, Ol,K  ∆ ( E )) closed,even.

   Thus, to complete the proof of the theorem, it suffices to show that the map

                            ∆
                     Γ( M, Ol,K ( E))closed,even → RΓ( M, Ol,K
                                                           ∆
                                                               ( E))closed,even

is a weak equivalence. This will follow from the following lemma, combined with
Lemma 14.5.3.
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                              65


14.5.5 Lemma. The homotopy groups of the simplicial sets Γ( M, Ol,K  ∆ ( E )) closed,even and RΓ ( M, O ∆ ( E )) closed,even
                                                                                                       l,K
are given by
                                           
                        ∆
              πn Γ( M, Ol,K ( E))closed,even = H |n| (Γ( M, Ol,K ), Q)
                                           
                        ∆
             πn RΓ( M, Ol,K ( E))closed,even = H |n| (RΓ( M, Ol,K
                                                                ∆
                                                                   )[0], Q + d DR ).

On the right hand side we are using Z/2-graded cohomology groups. These equations are true
for all n ≥ 0.
   This is just a Z/2-graded version of the Dold-Kan correspondence.

Proof. The n-simplices of Γ( M, Ol,K ∆ ( E )) closed,even are closed and even elements of the

complex Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ Γ( M, Ol,k ( E)), where we are using a completed tensor product.
Similarly, the n-simplices of RΓ( M, Ol,K ∆ ( E )) closed,even are given by closed even elements

of Ω∗ (∆n ) ⊗ RΓ( M, O(∆l,K) )[0], where we are using, again, an appropriate completed
tensor product.
   Let (V, dV ) be one of these two Z/2-graded complexes, so
                                    (
                                      (Γ( M, Ol,k ( E), Q)
                       (V, dV ) =
                                      (RΓ( M, O(∆l,K) )[0], Q + d DR )

Let V ∆ be the simplicial set whose n-simplices are closed even elements of V ⊗ Ω∗ (∆n ),
where we use an appropriate completed tensor product. We need to calculate the ho-
motopy groups of V ∆ .
   As V ∆ is a Kan complex, we can calculate these homotopy groups as homotopy
classes of maps from spheres to V ∆ . Let us take 0 as a base point in V ∆ . Let Sn be a
simplicial set representing the n sphere, and let p ∈ Sn be a base point. A base point
preserving map f : Sn → V ∆ is given by an even element
                                      ω f ∈ V ⊗ Ω ∗ ( S n , p) .
which is closed, (dV + d DR )ω = 0.
 Thus, ω f gives a class

                            [ω f ] ∈ H 0 (V ⊗ Ω∗ ( Sn , p)) = H |n| (V ).
(Here we are using Z/2-graded cohomology groups).
   We need to show that if the map f : Sn → V ∆ changes by a homotopy, then the
class [ω f ] remains unchanged, and conversely, if we change ω f to something coho-
mologous, then the corresponding map Sn → V ∆ changes by a homotopy.
   If f , g : Sn → V ∆ are base point preserving maps, a base point preserving homotopy
between them is given by an element η ∈ V ⊗ Ω∗ ( Sn × [0, 1], p × [0, 1]), which is even
and closed, and which restricts to ω f and ωg at 0 and 1.
   Since
                        H ∗ (V ⊗ Ω∗ ( Sn × [0, 1], p × [0, 1])) = H |n| (V )
the existence of such a homotopy implies that [ω f ] = [ωg ].
66                                            KEVIN COSTELLO


     Conversely, suppose φ ∈ V ⊗ Ω∗ ( Sn , p) is an odd element such that

                                        (dV + d DR )φ = ω f − ωg .

Then if we let

                η = ω f + t(ωg − ω f ) + φdt ∈ V ⊗ Ω∗ ( Sn × [0, 1], p × [0, 1])

then η is an even element satisfying (dV + d DR )η = 0, so η defines a homotopy be-
tween f and g.
                                                                                 

     This completes the proof of theorem D.


                  15. L OCAL COMPUTATIONS IN C HERN -S IMONS THEORY
  We will apply the theory developed in the previous section to construct a canonical
up to homotopy solution of the renormalised quantum master equation in the case of
Chern-Simons theory.
  In this section, therefore, let M be a manifold of dimension

                                             dim M = n ≥ 2.

Let g be a locally trivial sheaf of Lie algebras 4 over C on M, with a non-degenerate
invariant symmetric pairing of the opposite parity to n, with values in the constant
sheaf C.
  Let
                                             E = Ω∗ ( M, g)[1].
Let E denote the corresponding vector bundle on M, so Γ( M, E) = E . Let SCS ∈ Ol (E )
denote the Chern-Simons action.
15.0.6 Theorem. There is a canonical, up to a contractible choice, element

                                         S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]])/C[[h̄ ]]

which solves the renormalised quantum master equation modulo constants, and is of the form

                                     S = SCS + h̄S(1) + h̄2 S(2) + · · ·


  The proof was sketched in the introduction; the idea is to show that locally, in a flat
metric, SCS satisfies the renormalised QME. These local solutions together will give a
global solution in a curved metric.

     4We could also use L
                            ∞ algebras, and the construction works in more or less the same way.
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                       67


15.1. Simplicial presheaves of metrics. The bundle on M playing the role of F in
section 14 is the bundle Met → M, whose fibres are metrics on the tangent space of
M. As in section 14, we have a simplicial presheaf associated to Met, defined by saying
Γ(U, Met [d]) is the set of smooth family of metrics on U parametrised by ∆d .
   Let FMet ⊂ Met be the sub-simplicial presheaf given by families of flat metrics on
U.
15.1.1 Lemma. If U is a ball in M, then Γ(U, FMet) is contractible.
Proof. Pick an isomorphism between U and { x ∈ Rn | k xk < 1}. The standard flat
metric on the ball in Rn gives a metric on U, which we call g0 .
  Let x1 , . . . , xn denote our coordinates on U. If g is a smooth family of flat metrics on
U, parametrised by ∆d , then, in these coordinates, we can write g as

                                    ∑         gi j ( x, σ )dxi ⊗ dx j .
                                 1≤ i, j≤ n

Here gi j ( x, σ ) is smooth in the σ variables, and smooth in the x variables. To show
that the simplicial set of such g is contractible, it suffices to construct a simplicial map
                            Γ(U, FMet) × ∆1 → Γ(U, FMet),
which is a simplicial homotopy between the identity on Γ(U, FMet) and the projection
onto the flat metric g0 = ∑ dxi ⊗ dxi . A d-simplex in Γ(U, FMet) × ∆1 is of course a
d-simplex in Γ(U, FMet) and a d-simplex on ∆1 . A d-simplex in ∆1 is given by a non-
decreasing map of sets {0, 1, . . . , d} → {0, 1}. Such a d-simplex yields an affine linear
map ∆d → ∆1 .
   Let A ⊂ Γ(U, FMet) denote the simplicial set of constant metrics, i.e. those for
which gi j ( x, σ ) is independent of x ∈ U. Of course, this is just the simplicial set whose
0-simplices are positive-definite inner products on the vector space Rn , and whose
d-simplices are smooth families of such.
   First we construct a deformation retraction of Γ(U, FMet) onto A. This is given by
a map Φ : Γ(U, FMet) × ∆1 → Γ(U, FMet), defined as follows. Suppose we have a d-
simplex in Γ(U, FMet ) × ∆1 , corresponding to g ∈ Γ(U, FMet )[d] and an affine linear
map p : ∆d → ∆1 . If, as above, g = ∑ gi j ( x, σ )dxi ⊗ dx j , we define Φ( g, p) by

                          Φ( g, p) = ∑ gi j ( p(σ ) x, σ )dxi ⊗ dx j .
Φ is easily seen to give the required homotopy; when we restrict to Γ(U, FMet) ×
{1} ⊂ Γ(U, FMet) × ∆1 , Φ is the identity, and when we restrict to Γ(U, FMet) × {0},
Φ is a projection onto A.
   Next we need to show that the simplicial set A is contractible. Note that the space
of positive-definite inner products on Rn is GL(n, R)/ O (n.R). A simplex in A is a
continuous map ∆d → GL(n, R)/ O(n, R), which is smooth on the top simplices of
some barycentric subdivision of ∆d . Thus, to show A is contractible, it suffices to
construct a smooth homotopy equivalence between GL (n, R)/ O(n, R) and a point.
This is easy to do using (for instance) the Gram-Schmidt procedure.
                                                                                    
68                                   KEVIN COSTELLO


   The simplicial presheaf FMet is not necessarily locally fibrant. Thus, our definition
of RΓ is not well-behaved when applied to FMet. Therefore, we will instead consider
RΓ applied to a modification of FMet.
   Let Ex∞ denote Kan’s fibrant replacement functor for simplicial sets. If X is a sim-
plicial set, then Ex∞ ( X ) is a fibrant simplicial set equipped with a map to X which is
a weak equivalence. Define Ex∞ FMet by saying that
                         Γ(U, Ex∞ FMet ) = Ex∞ Γ(U, FMet).
Since Ex∞ FMet is locally fibrant, RΓ( M, Ex∞ FMet ) is well-behaved. This is the cor-
rect version of derived global sections of FMet.
15.1.2 Corollary. RΓ( M, Ex∞ FMet ) is contractible.
   This is immediate from Corollary 14.1.5 and Lemma 15.1.1.
   We apply our local to global principle as follows. We would like to construct a
homotopy point of Γ( M, BV). Any map FMet → BV of simplicial presheaves would
yield such a homotopy point; indeed, such a map induces a map
                        RΓ( M, Ex∞ FMet) → RΓ( M, Ex∞ BV).
We know that RΓ( M, Ex∞ FMet ) is contractible. Also, Γ( M, BV) is weakly equivalent
to RΓ( M, BV), and therefore to RΓ( M, Ex∞ BF). Thus, a map FMet → BV yields a
point (up to contractible choice) of Γ( M, BV).
15.1.3 Theorem. Let U ⊂ M be an open subset, and let
                                   g ∈ Γ(U, FMet[d])

be a smooth family of flat metrics on U parametrised by the d-simplex ∆d . Then the usual
Chern-Simons action SCS satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation on U, and so
defines an element
                                  SCS ∈ Γ(U, BV[d]).


     This theorem gives a map
                                      FMet → BV
of simplicial presheaves. Thus, once we have proved this result, we will have proved
Theorem 15.0.6.

15.2. Proof of Theorem 15.1.3. We want to show that, locally in a flat metric, all the
obstructions O( I,K) ( SCS ) vanish, for I ≥ 0, K > 0.
  Since everything is local, it suffices to work with small open sets U in M, with a
smooth family of flat metrics parametrised by ∆d .
  Let us trivialise our flat bundle of Lie algebras g on U. The space of fields is the
Ω∗ (∆d )-module
                                 Ω ∗ (U ) ⊗ Ω ∗ ( ∆ d ) ⊗ g
                RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                   69


                               d                                   ∗                 ∗
with the differential dU      ∆
                       DR + d DR , and the gauge fixing condition d . The operator d
                                  d
depends on the coordinates in ∆ . The Hamiltonian H is
                                                      d
                                                      ∗
                                   H = [dU      ∆
                                         DR + d DR , d ].

  Recall that n = dim M. Let us give Rn the standard flat metric. It is easy to check
that one can find an open subset V ⊂ Rn × ∆d , and an isomorphism U × ∆d → V,
such that the diagram
                                      U × ∆d          x
                                                       // V
                                                     x
                                                   xx
                                                xxx
                                          {{xx
                                        ∆d
commutes, and which is compatible with the metrics along the fibres of the projection
maps to ∆d .
  The isomorphism chosen above gives an isomorphism

                            Ω ∗ (U ) ⊗ Ω ∗ ( ∆ d ) ⊗ g ∼
                                                       = Ω ∗ (V )
of differential graded Ω∗ (∆d )-modules. The differential on both sides is simply the
de Rham differential on U × ∆d , or on V. Because the metric along the fibres of the
map U × ∆d → ∆d corresponds to that along the fibres of the map V → ∆d , this
isomorphism also takes the operator d∗ on the left hand side to the corresponding one
on the right hand side.
   The propagator is constructed from the de Rham differential on U × ∆d , and the
operator d∗ . Thus, it suffices to show that the obstructions O( I,K) ( SCS ) vanish when
we work with V instead of U × ∆d . Since the obstruction is local, it suffices to work in
Rn × ∆ d .
   We have reduced to the case of Rn with the constant family of flat metrics. Thus, it
suffices to show the following.
15.2.1 Theorem. Let SCS be the usual Chern-Simons action on Rn with the flat metric. Then
   (1) There are no counter-terms.
   (2) SCS satisfies the renormalised quantum master equation.
   This result implies, in particular, that the construction is independent of the choice
of renormalisation scheme. The choice of renormalisation scheme is only involved
in constructing the bijection between the set of local functionals S ∈ Ol (E , C[[h̄ ]])
and the set of systems of effective actions satisfying the renormalisation group equa-
tion. However, because there are no counter-terms, the system of effective actions
{Γ( P(0, T ), SCS )} associated to the Chern-Simons action SCS is independent of the
choice of renormalisation scheme.
   The proof of this theorem will follow closely the results of Kontsevich [Kon94,
Kon03]. In particular, we make use of the compactifications of configuration spaces
used in these papers, and we rely on a certain vanishing theorem proved by Kontse-
vich in [Kon94] when n ≥ 3, and in [Kon03] when n = 2.
70                                             KEVIN COSTELLO


  Let Conf m (Rn ) denote the space of m distinct ordered points in Rn . There is a partial
compactification Conf m (Rn ) of Conf m (Rn ) with the following properties.
     (1) Conf 2 (Rn ) is the real blow-up along the diagonal of Rn × Rn .
     (2) Conf m (Rn ) admits a proper map to Rnm such that the diagram

                                   Conf m (Rn )             // Conf (Rn )
                                                                   m
                                                          nn  nn
                                                        nn
                                                     nnn
                                              wwnnn
                                       Rnm
         commutes.
     (3) For any i, j with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m and i 6= j, there is a projection map
                                      πi, j : Confm (Rn ) → R2n
        given by forgetting all factors except i and j. This map lifts to Conf 2 (Rn ).
The partial compactification we use was constructed in [Kon94, Kon03]. This is the
real version of the Fulton-MacPherson compactification of configuration spaces of al-
gebraic varieties [FM94].
  Let
                                   E = Ω ∗ ( Rn ) ⊗ g [ 1 ]
be the space of fields, and let
                                         Ec = Ω∗c (Rn ) ⊗ g[1]
be the space of compactly supported fields.
  Let                                Z                   T
                                   P(ε, T ) =                d∗ Kt dt ∈ E ⊗ E .
                                                     ε
15.2.2 Lemma. Up to an overall constant,
                                    Z kx− yk2 /4ε
                                                                         !
                      P(ε, T ) =                         un/2−1 e−u du       π ∗ Vol Sn−1 ⊗ Ig
                                     k x− yk2 / 4T

where
   (1)
                                       π : Conf2 (Rn ) → Sn−1
           is the projection
                                  ( x, y) → ( x − y)/ k x − yk .
     (2) Vol Sn−1 is the standard volume form on Sn−1 , given by the formula
                                                 n
                          Vol Sn−1 = k zk−n ∑ (−1)i zi dz1 · · · dz
                                                                 ci · · · dzn .
                                                i= 1
     (3)
                                              Ig ∈ g ⊗ g
           is the tensor dual to the pairing on g.
                      RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                              71


Proof. The proof is an explicit calculation. The sign conventions we are using imply
that the heat kernel is
                                                   2
                  Kt = Ct−n/2 e−kx− yk /4t d( x1 − y1 ) ∧ · · · ∧ d( xn − yn ) ⊗ Ig
where C is a certain normalising constant. It follows that
                                             n
  d∗ Kt = C ′ t−n/2−1 e−kx− yk /4t ∑ (−1)i ( xi − yi )d( x1 − y1 ) · · · d(\
                              2
                                                                           xi − yi )
                                            i= 1
                                                                                              · · · d( xn − yn ) ⊗ Ig
where C ′ is a constant. Now,
            Z T                                                             Z kx− yk2 /4ε
                      − n/ 2− 1 −k x− yk2 / 4t             ′′          −n
                  t            e                 dt = C k x − yk                    2
                                                                                            un/2−1 e−u du
             ε                                                               k x− yk / 4T

for some constant C ′′ . This follows from the change of variables u = k x − yk2 /4t.                                   
15.2.3 Corollary. The form P(0, T ) ∈ Ω∗ (Conf 2 (Rn )) ⊗ g⊗2 extends to a smooth form in
Ω∗ (Conf 2 (Rn )) ⊗ g⊗2 .
Proof. The map π : Conf 2 (Rn ) → Sn−1 extends to a map Conf 2 (Rn ) → Sn−1 , which
implies that the form π ∗ Vol Sn−1 extends to a smooth form on Conf 2 (Rn ). It remains to
                                        R kx− yk2 /4ε n/2−1 −u
show that the ε → 0 limit of                         u     e du is a smooth function on Conf (Rn ).             2
                                         k x− yk2 / 4T
Note that this ε → 0 limit is the incomplete gamma function
                           Z ∞
                                    2
                                            un/2−1 e−u du = Γ(n/2, k x − yk 2 /4T ).
                             k x− yk / 4T

The function t → Γ(n/2, t2 ) is smooth, and the function k x − yk : Conf 2 (Rn ) → R is
smooth, which implies that Γ(n/2, k x − yk2 /4T ) is smooth.                         
15.2.4 Lemma. The differential of P(0, T ) on Conf 2 (Rn ) is −KT .
Proof. If we think of P(0, T ) as a de Rham current on Rn × Rn , we know its differential
is the delta current on the diagonal, minus KT . Since P(0, T ) is a smooth form on
Conf 2 (Rn ), its differential must be smooth, and is determined by its restriction to
Conf 2 (Rn ), where it is equal to −KT .                                               
  As before, we can attempt to define
                                                       Γ( P(ε, T ), SCS )
as an element of O (Ec , C[[h̄ ]]), the space of functionals on the compactly supported
fields. It is not completely obvious that this is well defined. However,
15.2.5 Proposition. Fix 0 < T < ∞ and i ≥ 0, k > 0. Then Γ(i,k) ( P(ε, T ), SCS ) is a well-
defined continuous linear functional Ec⊗k → C. Further, the limit limε→0 Γ(i,k) ( P(ε, T ), SCS )
exists.
  This proposition implies that all the counter-terms vanish.
72                                       KEVIN COSTELLO


Proof. Let α ∈ Ec⊗k . Standard Feynman graph techniques allow one to write
                                                              1
                      Γ(i,k) ( P(ε, T ), SCS )(α ) = ∑              wγ (ε, T, α )
                                                          γ Aut(γ )

where the sum is over connected trivalent graphs γ, whose first Betti number is i, with
k external edges. The weight wγ attached to each graph is a certain integral; we will
show that these integrals converge absolutely, even when we set ε = 0.
   Let γ be such a trivalent graph, and let V (γ ), E(γ ) denote the sets of vertices and
edges of γ. Vertices are all trivalent; the end points of the external edges are not con-
sidered vertices. Also, the external edges are not elements of E(γ ).
   We will define a differential form ωγ (ε, T, α ) on the space ConfV (γ ) (Rn ). I’ll ignore
signs, as we only want to show convergence. (Technically, the form ωγ is associated
to a trivalent graph with a certain orientation).
   Only graphs with no loops (i.e. edges joining a vertex to itself) appear in the sum.
The weights of graphs with loops vanish, because the propagator P(ε, T ) (which is
form on Rn × Rn ) is zero when restricted to the diagonal.
   For each edge e ∈ E(γ ), let
                              πe : ConfV (γ ) (Rn ) → Conf2 (Rn )
be the projection correspond to the two vertices attached to e.
  Let
                              φ : ConfV (γ ) (Rn ) → Rnk
be the projection corresponding to the k vertices of γ which are attached to external
edges.
  The form attached to the graph is
                                                                         
                 ωγ (ε, T, α ) = ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv φ∗α ∧e∈ E(γ ) πe∗ P(ε, T ) .

Let me explain this notation. The expression inside the bracket is an element
                  φ∗α ∧e∈ E(γ ) πe∗ P(ε, T ) ∈ Ω∗ (ConfV (γ ) (Rn )) ⊗ g⊗ H (γ ) ,
where H (γ ) is the set of half-edges (or germs of edges) of γ. Half-edges include exter-
nal edges. Let H (v) denote the set of 3 half-edges at a vertex v. For each v, there is a
trace map
                                        Trgv : g⊗ H (v) → C
defined by hX, [Y, Z ]i . Thus,
                                   ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv : g⊗ H (γ ) → C
so that
                              ωγ (ε, T, α ) ∈ Ω∗ (ConfV (γ ) (Rn )).
     The weight attached to γ is
                                                Z
                              wγ (ε, T, α ) =                    ωγ (ε, T, α ).
                                                    ConfV (γ )
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                 73


We have to show that this integral converges absolutely, for all ε ≥ 0 and all 0 < T <
∞.
   The problems that could occur would be if some of the points in the configuration
space went to ∞. However, we are putting a compactly supported form at the vertices
which are attached to external edges, and (since k > 0) there is at least one such vertex.
If the two points in Rn attached to the end points of an edge e become very far apart,
then πe∗ P(ε, T ) decays exponentially. If the point in Rn attached to one of the vertices
goes to ∞, and another point is constrained to lie in a compact set because of the
compactly supported form, then we must have an edge e whose end points are far
apart. Thus, if any of the points in Rn attached to vertices tend to ∞, the integrand
decays exponentially. This implies that the integral converges absolutely.              

  This proposition implies that
                             Γ( P(0, T ), SCS ) ∈ O (Ec , C[[h̄ ]])/C[[h̄ ]]
is well-defined. Note that we are working modulo the ring of constants.
   To prove our result, it remains to show that the appropriate quantum master equa-
tion is satisfied.
15.2.6 Proposition.
                           (d DR + h̄∆ T ) exp(Γ( P(0, T ), SCS )/h̄ ) = 0
modulo constants.
Proof. We can re-express the quantum master equation as
  d DR Γ( P(0, T ), SCS ) + {Γ( P(0, T ), SCS ), Γ( P(0, T ), SCS )}T + h̄∆ T Γ( P(0, T ), SCS ) = 0
where { }T is a certain bracket on the space of functionals. Up to sign, if f , g ∈ O (E )
are functionals, and KT = ∑ φ′ ⊗ φ′′ , then
                                                            ∂ f ∂g
                                          { f , g} T = ∑             .
                                                            ∂φ′ ∂φ′′
Working modulo constants amounts to ignoring the terms h̄∆ T Γ(i,2) ( P(0, T ), SCS ) for
any i, and {Γ(i,1) ( P(0, T ), SCS ), Γ( j,1) ( P(0, T ), SCS )}T for any i, j.
   In the proof of Proposition 15.2.5 we showed how to express Γ(i,k) ( P(0, T ), SCS )(α )
as a sum over trivalent graphs, with k external edges, and first Betti number i. The
weight attached to each trivalent graph γ is
                                                                               
                                  Z                                        ^
                wγ (0, T, α ) =                    ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv φ∗α                πe∗ P(0, T )
                                      ConfV (γ )
                                                                         e ∈ E (γ )

Here α ∈ Ec⊗k is the input, which we put at the external edges.
  By definition,
                  d DR Γ(i,k) ( P(0, T ), SCS )(α ) = Γ(i,k) ( P(0, T ), SCS )(d DRα ).
74                                                     KEVIN COSTELLO


Stokes’ theorem implies that
                                                                                                        
                                 Z                                              ^
     wγ (0, T, d DRα ) = −                         ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv φ∗α                    πe∗ P(0, T )
                                     ∂ConfV (γ )
                                                                             e ∈ E (γ )
                                                   Z
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                             ^
                             +        ∑ ± Conf                   ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv φ∗α ∧ πe∗ (KT )                     πe∗ P(0, T ) .
                                 e ∈ E (γ )             V (γ )                                             e′ 6=e

In the second line, we are using the fact that d DR P(0, T ) = −KT .
   The terms in the sum
                             Z
                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                            ^
                  ∑ ± Conf                       ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv φ∗α ∧ πe∗ (KT )                     πe∗ P(0, T )
                e ∈ E (γ )              V (γ )                                             e′ 6=e

where e is a separating edge cancel with terms in the graphical expansion of
                                       {Γ( P(0, T ), SCS ), Γ( P(0, T ), SCS )}T .
The terms where e is a non-separating edge cancel with terms in the graphical expan-
sion of h̄∆ T Γ( P(0, T ), SCS ).
   Thus, it remains to show that
                                                             
                             Z                                              ^
                    ∑ ± ∂Conf                    ⊗v∈V (γ ) Trgv φ∗α                   πe∗ P(0, T ) = 0.
                     γ                  V (γ )                            e ∈ E (γ )

This has been proved by Kontsevich in [Kon94] when n ≥ 3, and in [Kon03] when n =
2. Indeed, lemma 2.1 of [Kon94] implies that when n ≥ 3, the only boundary strata of
ConfV (γ ) which could contribute are those where precisely two points collide. The first
lemma in section 6 of [Kon03] proves the same statement when n = 2. The boundary
strata where only two points collide are taken care of by the Jacobi identity.         
                                                           A PPENDIX
     This appendix contains the proof of a generalised version of theorem A.
15.3. Statement of results. Let E be a super vector bundle on a compact manifold M,
whose space of global sections is denoted by E . As always, suppose E has an odd
symplectic structure. Let
                                        H0 : E ⊗ C ∞ ( ∆ d ) → E ⊗ C ∞ ( ∆ d )
be a smooth family of generalised Laplacians, parametrised by ∆d . Thus, H0 is a
C ∞ (∆d ) linear map, which is an order two differential operator with respect to M.
The symbol of H0 is a section
                                            σ ( H0 ) : Γ( T ∗ M × ∆d , End E).
The statement that H0 is a family of generalised Laplacians says that σ ( H0 ) is a smooth
family of metrics on T ∗ M, parametrised by ∆d , times the identity in End E.
  Let
                            H1 : E ⊗ Ω ∗ ( ∆ d ) → E ⊗ Ω ∗ ( ∆ d )
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                           75


be an even Ω∗ (∆d ) linear map, which is a first order differential operator with respect
to M. Then
                                     H = H0 + H1
is a smooth family of generalised Laplacians parametrised by the super-manifold ∆d ×
R0,d .
   The results of [BGV92], appendix to chapter 9, imply that there is a unique heat
kernel
                                 Kt ∈ E ⊗ E ⊗ Ω ∗ ( ∆ d )
for the operator H.
   Let
                            D : E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ) → E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
be any odd Ω∗ (∆d ) linear differential operator, commuting with H.
  As before, let
                                    Z T
                       P(ε, T ) =         ( D ⊗ 1)Kt dt ∈ E ⊗ E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
                                      ε
be the propagator.
15.3.1 Theorem. Let
                             S ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ A ⊗ C[[h̄ ]])
be a function which, modulo h̄, is at least cubic. More explicitly, S has a Taylor series expansion
                                          S = ∑ h̄i Si,kφi,k (ε)
                                              i,k≥ 0

where Si,k : E → Ω∗ (∆d ) is a local functional, homogeneous of degree k, and φi,k (ε) ∈ A .
  Then we can form
                        Γ ( P(ε, T ), S) = ∑ h̄ i Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S)
                                                 i≥ 0,k≥ 0
as before.
    (1) There exist functions fr ∈ A and Φr ∈ O (E , Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ C ∞ (0, ∞)), for r ∈ Z≥0 ,
        such that there is a small ε asymptotic expansion
                            Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S)(e) ≃ ∑ fr (ε)Φr (e, T )
        for all e ∈ E .
    (2) Each Φr (e, T ) has a small T asymptotic expansion
                                    Φr (e, T ) ≃ ∑ Φr,s (e) gs ( T )
        where the functions Φr,s are local functionals of e, that is,
                                      Φr,s ∈ Ol (E , Ω∗ (∆d )).
        The gs ( T ) are certain smooth functions of T ∈ (0, ∞).
    (3) We can view the coefficients Φr,s as linear maps E ⊗k → Ω∗ (∆d ). Thus, we can speak
        of the germ of Φr,s near a point x. This germ only depends on the germ of the operators
        H, D, S near x × ∆d .
76                                               KEVIN COSTELLO


Remark: At one stage in the paper, we need a slight generalisation of this result, which
involves a propagator δKε where δ is an odd parameter of square zero. The proof
given below incorporates this case also.
Remark: Recall that A ⊂ C ∞ ((0, ∞)) is the sub-algebra spanned over C by functions
of ε of the form
                               Z
                                            F ( t1 , . . . , tn ) 1/ 2
                       f (ε) =                                         dt1 · · · dtn
                                 U ⊂(ε,1) n G ( t1 , . . . , tn ) 1/ 2
and functions of the form
                                Z
                                                  F ( t1 , . . . , tn = ε) 1/ 2
                      f (ε) =                                                   dt1 · · · dtn−1
                                    U ⊂(ε,1) n −1 G ( t1 , . . . , tn = ε) 1/ 2

where
  (1) F, G ∈ Z≥0 [t1 , . . . , tn ] \ {0}; n can take on any value.
  (2) the region of integration U is an open subset cut out by finitely many equations
      of the form tli > t j , for l ∈ Z.
     Let me explain more precisely what I mean by small ε asymptotic expansion. Let
      d                                                                       d
k·k∆l be the C l norm on the space Ω∗ (∆d ), so that kωk∆l is the supremum over ∆d of
the sum of all order ≤ l derivatives of ω.
  Let us consider Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) as a linear map E ⊗k → Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ C ∞ ({0 < ε < T }).
The precise statement is that for all R, l ∈ Z≥0 and compact subsets K ⊂ (0, ∞), there
exists m ∈ Z≥0 such that
                                                                                  ∆d
                                                       R
               sup Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S)(α ) − ∑ f r (ε)Φr ( T, α )                      < εR+1 kα km
               T ∈K                                   r=0                         l

for all T sufficiently small. Here kα km             denotes the C m norm on the space E ⊗k .
   The small T asymptotic expansion in part (2) has a similar definition.

15.4. Expressions in terms of integrals attached to graphs. Standard Feynman graph
techniques allow one to represent each Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) as a finite sum
                                                                   1
                                Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S)(α ) = ∑             wγ (α )
                                                                γ Aut γ

where α ∈ E ⊗k , and the sum is over certain graphs γ. The graphs γ that appear in
the sum are connected graphs, with k legs (or external lines). Each vertex is assigned
a degree in Z≥0 , corresponding to the power of h̄ attached to the vertex. Degree zero
vertices are at least trivalent, and the sum of the degrees of the vertices, plus the first
Betti number of the graph, must be equal to i. There are a finite number of such graphs.
To each graph is attached a certain integral, whose value is wγ (α ).
   I won’t describe in detail the formula for the particular graph integrals appearing
in the expansion of Γ(i,k) ( P(ε, T ), S). Instead, I will describe a very general class of
graph integrals, which include those appearing in the sum above. The theorem will
be proved for this general class of graph integrals.
                      RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                            77


15.5. Asymptotics of graph integrals.
15.5.1 Definition. A labelled graph is a connected graph γ , with some number of legs (or
external edges).
   For each vertex v of γ, let H (v) denote the set of half edges (or germs of edges) emanating
from v; a leg attached at v counts as a half edge.
   Also, γ has an ordering on the sets of vertices, edges, legs and on the set of half edges attached
to each vertex.
   Each vertex v of γ is labelled by an element
                              Sv ∈ PolyDiff (E ⊗ H (v) , Dens( M )) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ).
Sv is a smooth family of polydifferential operators parametrised by ∆d . Let O(v) denote the
order of Sv .

   Let L(γ ) denote the set of legs of γ. Fix α ∈ E ⊗ L(γ ) , and fix te ∈ (0, ∞) for each
e ∈ E(γ ). Define a function fγ (te , α ) as follows.
   Let H (γ ) denote the set of half edges of γ, so H (γ ) = ∪v∈V (γ ) H (v). By putting Kte
at each edge of γ, and α at the legs, we get an element
                                                  α ⊗ e ∈ E (γ ) K t e ∈ E ⊗ H (γ ) .
On the other hand, the polydifferential operators Sv at the vertices define a map
            Z                                                                                            R
                                                                                                             V (γ )
                                      ⊗ H (γ )                             ⊗ V (γ )             ∗
                           ⊗ Sv : E              → Dens( M )                                       Md
                                                                                         ⊗ Ω (∆ ) −−−→ Ω∗ (∆d ).
                M V (γ )
Let                                           Z                                       
                            fγ ( te , α ) =                  ⊗ S v α ⊗ e ∈ E (γ ) K t e ∈ Ω ∗ ( ∆ d ) .
                                                  M V (γ )
   The graph integrals wγ which appear in the expansion of Γi,k ( P(ε, T ), S) can be re-
alised as finite sums of functions of the form
                                                              fγ ( te , α , S v )
for certain local functionals Sv . Terms in the sum can be multiplied by elements of A .
15.5.2 Theorem. The integral
                                                              Z
                                   Fγ (ε, T, α ) =                                   fγ (te , α ) ∏ dte
                                                                  te ∈(ε,T ) E(γ )

has an asymptotic expansion as ε → 0 of the form
                                           Fγ (ε, T, α ) ≃ ∑ f r (ε)Ψr ( T, α )
where f r ∈ A , and the Ψr are continuous linear maps
                                        E ⊗ L(γ ) → C ∞ ((0, ∞)) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
where T is the coordinate on (0, ∞).
  Further, each Ψr ( T, α ) has a small T asymptotic expansion
                                                                                     Z
                                          Ψr ( T, α ) ≃ ∑ gr ( T )                           Φr,k (α )
                                                                                         M
78                                       KEVIN COSTELLO


where
                    Φr,k ∈ PolyDiff (E ⊗ L(γ ) , Densities ( M )) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ).
and gr are smooth functions of T ∈ (0, ∞).
     The phrase “asymptotic expansion” is to be interpreted in the same sense as before.
Remark: There is a variant of this result, which incorporates a propagator of the form
P(ε, T ) + δKε , where δ is an odd parameter of square zero. In this case, the graphs we
use may have one special edge, on which we put Kε instead of Kte . Thus, instead of
integrating over the parameter te for this edge, we specialise to ε.
15.6. Asymptotics of heat kernels. The proof is based on the asymptotic expansion
of the heat kernels of generalised Laplacians, proved in [BGV92]. The operator
                               H : E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ) → E ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
is a smooth family of generalised Laplacians parametrised by the supermanifold with
corners ∆d × R0,d . A generalised Laplacian on the vector bundle E on M (whose global
sections is E ) is specified by a metric on M, a connection on E and a potential F ∈
Γ( M, End( E)). A smooth family of generalised Laplacians is a family where this data
varies smoothly; this is equivalent to saying that the operator varies smoothly. We
are dealing with a smooth family parametrised by the super-manifold ∆d × R0,d . The
metric on M will be independent of the odd coordinates R0,d , but the parameters for
the connection and the potential will both involve Grassmann variables. (I’m very
grateful to Ezra Getzler for explaining this point of view to me.)
   Let x ∈ M. Let U ⊂ M × ∆d denote the open subset of points ( y, σ ) where
dσ ( x, y) < ε. Normal coordinates on U gives an isomorphism
                                          U∼
                                           = Bεn × ∆d
where Bεn is the ball of radius ε in Rn , and n = dim M.
 Thus, we get an isomorphism
             C ∞ (U × R0,d ) = C ∞ (U ) ⊗ C[dt1 , . . . , dtd ] ∼
                                                                = C ∞ ( Bεn ) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
of Ω∗ (∆d ) algebras.
   The vector bundle E becomes a vector bundle (still called E) on Bεn , and we find
                      Γ(U, E) ⊗ C[dt1 , . . . , dtd ] ∼
                                                      = Γ( Bεn , E) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ).
The following is a variant of a result proved in [BGV92], following [MP49, BGM71,
MS67].
15.6.1 Theorem. There exists a small t asymptotic expansion of Kt which, in these coordi-
nates, is of the form
                               Kt ≃ t− dim M/2 e−kx− yk /t ∑ tiφi
                                                          2


                                                          i≥ 0
                                                    n
where x, y denote coordinates on the two copies of Bε , and
                             φi ∈ Γ( Bεn , E) ⊗ Γ( Bεn , E) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ).
                     RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                                79


If we denote
                                                                                         N
                                         KtN = t− dim M/2 e−kx− yk /t ∑ tiφi
                                                                                    2


                                                                                        i= 0
then for all l ∈ Z≥0
                                             Kt − KtN                = O(t N −dim M/2−l ).
                                                                 l
Here k·kl denotes the C l norm on the space C ∞ ( Bεn ) ⊗ C ∞ ( Bεn ) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ).
  This precise statement is not proved in [BGV92], as they do not use Grassmann
parameters. But, as Ezra Getzler explained to me, the proof in [BGV92] goes through
mutatis mutandis.
15.7. Proof of Theorem 15.5.2. In this proof, I will often avoid mention of the param-
eter space ∆d × R0,d . Thus, if f is some expression which depends on this parameter
space, I will often abuse notation and write | f | for the C l norm of f as a function of the
∆d × R0,d variables, for some l.
   Let us enumerate the edges of γ as e1 , . . . , ek . Let ti = tei , and let us consider the
region where t1 > t2 > · · · > tk . (Of course we have to consider all orderings of the
edges of γ).
                                                                                           I ( i)
   For a function I : E(γ ) = {1, . . . , k} → Z≥0 , let | I | = ∑ I (i ). Let t I = ∏ ti .
Similarly, if n ∈ Z, let tn = ∏ tni .
   Let
                                      O(γ ) = ∑ O(v).
                                                                       v ∈ V (γ )
   For R > 1 let
                                                        A R,T ⊂ (0, T ) E(γ )
be the region where tiR < t j for all i, j. This means that the ti are all of a similar size.
15.7.1 Proposition. For all r ≥ 0, there exist
    (1) Fi , Gi ∈ Z≥0 [t1 , . . . , tk ] \ {0} for 1 ≤ i ≤ cr ,
    (2) polydifferential operators
                               Ψi ∈ PolyDiff (E ⊗ L(γ ) , Dens ( M )) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
        for 1 ≤ i ≤ cr ,
such that
                        cr                                   Z
                             Fi (t1 , . . . , tk )1/2
 fγ ( t1 , . . . , tk ) − ∑                           1/ 2
                                                                     Ψi (α ) ≤ kα kr+1−χ(γ ) dim M/2+O(γ )(|E(γ )|+1) tr1+1
                       i = 1 Gi ( t 1 , . . . , t k )            M

for all {t1 , . . . , tk } ∈ A R,T with t1 > t2 > · · · > tk and t1 sufficiently small. In this
expression, χ(γ ) is the Euler characteristic of the graph.
Proof. As above, let
                                                                                                N
                         KtN ( x, y) = t− dim M/2 Ψ( x, y)e−k x− yk /t ∑ tiφi ( x, y)
                                                                                         2


                                                                                               i= 0
80                                             KEVIN COSTELLO


be the approximation to the heat kernel to order t N . This expression is written in
normal coordinates near the diagonal in M 2 . The φi ( x, y) are sections of E ⊠ E defined
near the diagonal on M 2 . Ψ( x, y) is a cut-off function, which is 1 when k x − yk < ε
and 0 when k x − yk > 2ε.
  We have the bound
                           Kt ( x, y) − KtN ( x, y)              = O(t N −dim M/2−l ).
                                                             l

   The first step is to replace each Kti by KtNi on each edge of the graph. Thus, let
fγN (ti , α ) be the function constructed like fγ (ti , α ) except using KtNi in place of Kti .
                                                                                         N − O (γ )− dim M / 2
  Each time we replace Kti by KtNi , we get a contribution of ti                from the
edge ei , times the O(γ ) norm of the contribution of the remaining edges, times kα kO(γ ) .
                                                                                                          − O (γ )− dim M / 2
 The O(γ ) norm of the contribution of the remaining edges is ∏ j6=i t j                                                        .
We are thus left with the bound
                     fγ (ti , α ) − fγN (ti , α ) < Ct−O(γ )−dim M/2 t1N kα kO(γ )

where C is a constant. (Recall our notation : tn denotes ∏ tni ).
 In particular, if the ti are in A R,T , we find that
                                                                   N −|E (γ )|( O (γ )+ dim M / 2) R+ 1
                 fγ (ti , α ) − fγN (ti , α ) < kα k O(γ ) t1

if ti ∈ A R,T and ti are all sufficiently small.
    Next, we construct a small ti asymptotic expansion of fγN (ti , α ). Recall that fγN (ti , α )
is defined as an integral over a small neighbourhood of the small diagonal in MV (γ ) .
Let
                                           n = dim M.
By using a partition of unity we can consider fγN (ti , α ) as an integral over a small
neighbourhood of zero in RnV (γ ) . This allows us to express fγN (ti , α ) as a finite sum of
integrals over RnV (γ ) , of the following form.
   For each vertex v of γ, we have a coordinate map xv : Rn|V (γ )| → Rn . Fix any ε > 0,
and let χ : [0, ∞) → [0, 1] be a smooth function with χ( x) = 1 if x < ε, and χ( x) = 0
if x > 2ε. Let us define a cut-off function ψ on RnV (γ ) by the formula
                                                                          
                                                                                                 2

                ψ = χ( ∑ xv                      ∑                                   ∑ xv
                                   2                                          −1
                                       )χ                   xv′ − |V (γ )|                          .
                                              v ′ ∈ V (γ )                         v ∈ V (γ )


Thus, ψ is zero unless all points xv are near their centre of mass |V (γ )| −1 ∑ xv , and ψ
is zero when this centre of mass is too far from the origin.
   For each 1 ≤ i ≤ k, let Qi be the quadratic for on Rn|V (γ )| defined by
             (
               0               if the edge ei is a loop, i.e. is attached to only one vertex
  Q i ( x) =                 2
               k xv1 − xv2 k   if v1 , v2 are the vertices attached to the edge ei
                    RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                                81


   We can write fγN as a finite sum of integrals of the form
                                Z
                                               ψe− ∑ Qi /ti ∑ t I −dim M/2−O(γ )Φ I,K ∂K,xα .
                                    RnV (γ )                I,K

In this expression,
        • The sum is over I : E(γ ) → Z≥0 , with all I (e) ≤ N + O(γ ) + 1, and multi-
             indices K : V (γ ) × {1, . . . , n} → Z≥0 , with ∑ K (v, i ) ≤ O(γ ). The notation ∂K,x
             denotes
                                                                     ∂
                                       ∂K,x =        ∏              K ( v,i)
                                                                             .
                                                v∈V (γ ) ,1≤ i≤ n ∂xv,i
               In this notation, we are pretending (by trivialising the vector bundle E on
             some small open sets in M) that α is a function on RnV (γ ) .
        • The Φ I,K are smooth functions on RnV (γ ) .
   Next, we will use Wick’s lemma to compute the asymptotics of this integral. Let
c = (1/ | V (γ )|) ∑ xv be the centre of mass function RnV (γ ) → Rn . We can perform the
integral in two steps, first integrating over the coordinates yv = xv − c, and secondly
by integrating over the variable c. (Of course, there are |V (γ )| − 1 independent yv
coordinates). The quadratic form ∑ Qi /ti on RnV (γ ) is non-degenerate on the subspace
of RnV (γ ) of vectors with a fixed centre of mass, for all ti ∈ (0, ∞). Thus, the integral
over the variables yv can be approximated with the help of Wick’s lemma.
   Let us order the set V (γ ) of vertices as v1 , v2 , . . . , vm . We will use the coordinates
y1 , . . . , ym−1 , and c on RnV (γ ) . Then fγN is a finite sum of integrals of the form
   Z                     Z
                    2
               χ(|w| )                             χ(∑ k yv k2 )e− ∑ Qi ( y)/ti ∑ t I −O(γ )−dim M/2 Φ I,K ∂K,w,yiα .
       w ∈Rn                 y1 ,...,ym −1   ∈Rn
Here we are using the same notation as before, in these new coordinates.
  To get an approximation to the inner integral, we take a Taylor expansion of the
functions α and Φ I,K around the point { yi = 0, w}, only expanding in the variables yi .
We take the expansion to order N. We find, as an approximation to the inner integral,
an expression of the form
       Z                                                                                        
                                                                                 ∂ Li ∂ Lw
         y1 ,...,ym −1 ∈Rn
                           e − ∑ Q i ( y)/ ti
                                              ∑t                      y cK,I,L ∏ L
                                                 I − dim M / 2− O (γ ) K
                                                                                ∂ i yi ∂ L w w
                                                                                               α
                                                                                                   yi =0

where the sum is over a finite number of multi-indices I, K, L, and cK,I,L are constants.
  We can calculate each such integral by Wick’s lemma. The application of Wick’s
lemma involves inverting the quadratic form ∑ Qi ( y)/ti . Let A = A(ti ) denote the
matrix of the quadratic form ∑ Qi ( y)/ti ; this
                                              is a square
                                                          matrix of size (dim M ) |V (γ )| ,
whose entries are sums of t− 1
                           i . Note that ∏ i= 1 ti A has polynomial entries.
                                           k

 Let                                              ! !
                                                                       k
                                                 Pγ (ti ) = det       ∏ ti     A .
                                                                      i= 1
This is the graph polynomial associated to γ (see [BEK06]). One important property
of Pγ is that it is a sum of monomials, each with a non-negative integer coefficient.
82                                                        KEVIN COSTELLO


     We can write
                                    A−1 = Pγ−1 B
where the entries of B are polynomial in the ti . Note also that
                                            det A = Pγ t−(dim M)(|V (γ )|−1)/2 .
(The expansion from Wick’s lemma gives an overall factor of (det A)−1/2).
  Thus, we find, using Wick’s lemma, an approximation of the form
                                                                                                              Z
                                                          ∑
                                 −1/ 2
                    fγN (ti ) ≃ Pγ                                         Pγ−l t I −dim M/2−O(γ )                    Ψl,I (α )
                                                                1                                                 M
                                                l ≥ 0,I:E (γ )→ 2 Z≥0

where the Ψl,I are polydifferential operators
                                               Ψl,I : E ⊗ L(γ ) → Densities ( M )
and the sum is finite (i.e. all but finitely many of the Ψl,I are zero).
  This expansion is of the desired form; it remains to bound the error term.
15.7.2 Lemma. The error term in this expansion is bounded by
                                 R( N + 1+( dim M ) χ(γ )/ 2−|E (γ )|O (γ ))
                                t1                                                         kα k N +1+O(γ )
for N sufficiently large and t1 sufficiently small. Here χ(γ ) is the Euler characteristic of the
graph.
Proof. The error in this expansion arises from the error in the Taylor expansion of the
functions α , Φ I,K around 0, and from the fact that we are neglecting the cut-off func-
tion. Thus, if N is sufficiently large, the magnitude of the error in the expansion can
be bounded by an expression of the form
                                     Z                    Z
            t− dim M/2−O(γ )
                                         w ∈Rn
                                                 χ( w )
                                                              y1 ,...,ym −1   ∈Rn
                                                                                      ∏ e− ∑ Q ( y)/t ∑ φK ∂K,w,y α .
                                                                                                 i        i
                                                                                                                                  j
                                                                                       e                      K

Here, the sum is over multi-indices K for the variables yi , w, each φK is homogeneous
of order N + 1 as a function of the variables yi , and | K | ≤ N + 1 + O(γ ), so we are
differentiating α at most this number of times.
   This integral only decreases if we decrease each ti . Since ti > t1R , we find we can
bound the integral by the corresponding integral using the quadratic form ∑ Qi ( y)/t1R .
Thus, we find a bound of
                                           Z                     Z
                                                                                           ∏ e− ∑ Q ( y)/t ∑ φK ∂K,w,y α .
        − R| E (γ )|( dim M / 2+ O (γ ))                                                                          R
       t1                                              χ( w )                                         i           1
                                                                                                                                      j
                                               w ∈Rn                 y1 ,...,ym −1   ∈Rn    e                          K

Wick’s lemma bounds this integral by
                  det(∑ Qi ( y)/t1R )−1/2 t1
                                                        R( N + 1−|E (γ )|( dim M / 2+ O (γ )))
                                                                                                      kα k N +1+O(γ )
Also,
                       det(∑ Qi ( y)/t1R )−1/2 = Ct1
                                                                                       R dim M |V (γ )|/ 2

where C is a constant, to yield the desired bound.                                                                                        
                      RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                                     83


                                                                                                                               
   A subgraph γ ′ of a graph γ is given by the set of edges E(γ ′ ) ⊂ E(γ ). The vertices
of the subgraph γ ′ are the ones that adjoin edges in E(γ ′ ). The legs of γ ′ are the half-
edges of γ, which adjoint vertices of γ ′ , but which are not part of any edge of γ ′ .
   Let us fix a proper subgraph γ ′ , and let us enumerate the edges of γ as e1 , . . . , ek ,
where e1 , . . . , el ∈ E(γ ′ ) and el +1 , . . . , ek ∈ E(γ ) \ E(γ ′ ). Let ti = tei .
   Let                                              Z
                    φγ ,γ ′ (tl +1 , . . . , tk ) =       1/ R
                                                                fγ (t1 , . . . , tk )dt1 · · · dtl
                                                         t1 ,...,tl ∈( tl +1 ,T )

15.7.3 Lemma. Let R ≫ 0 be sufficiently large. Then for all r > 0, there exist mr ∈ Z≥0 ,
a finite number of gi ∈ A , Fi , Gi ∈ Z≥0 [tl +1 , . . . , tk ] \ {0}, and continuous linear maps
Ψi : E ⊗ L(γ ) → Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ C ∞ ((0, ∞)) such that
                                                             Fi (tl +1 , . . . , tk )1/2
          φγ ,γ ′ (tl +1 , . . . , tk ) − ∑ gi (tl +1 )                                   1 / 2
                                                                                                                         +1
                                                                                                Ψi ( T, α ) < kα kmr trl + 1
                                                             Gi ( t l + 1 , . . . , t k )
for all tl +1 > · · · > tk > 0 with tlR+1 < tk , and tl +1 sufficiently small.
   Further, the Ψi admit small T asymptotic expansions
                                                                                    Z
                                          Ψi ( T, α ) ≃ ∑ ηi,k ( T )                        Φi,k (α )
                                                                                        M
where
                      Φi,k ∈ PolyDiff (E ⊗ L(γ ) , Densities ( M )) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
and ηi,k ( T ) are smooth functions of T.
Proof. We can write
                       f γ ( t 1 , . . . , t k , α ) = f γ ′ ( t l + 1 , . . . , t k , α ⊗ Kt 1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Kt l ) .
The right hand side of this equation denotes the graph integral for γ ′ with inputs being
tensor products of the heat kernels Kti , for 1 ≤ i ≤ l, and α .
   The starting point of the proof is Proposition 15.7.1 applied to each connected com-
ponent of the graph γ ′ . This proposition implies that we can approximate the con-
tribution of each such connected component by a local functional applied to the legs
of that connected component. If we approximate the contribution of each connected
component in this way, we are left with a graph integral Ψγ /γ ′ (t1 , . . . , tl , α ) for the
quotient graph γ /γ ′ , with certain local functionals at the vertices of γ /γ ′ .
   More formally, Proposition 15.7.1 implies that there exists a finite number of Fi , Gi ∈
Z≥0 [tl +1 , . . . , tk ] \ {0}, and Ψγi /γ ′ (t1 , . . . , tl , α ), which are graph integrals for γ /γ ′ , such
that
                                     Fi (tl +1 , . . . , tk )1/2 i
    fγ ( t1 , . . . , tk , α ) − ∑                                     Ψ ′ ( t1 , . . . , tl , α )
                                     Gi ( t l + 1 , . . . , t k ) 1 / 2 γ /γ
                                                +1
                                          < trl + 1 kα ⊗ Kt1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Ktl kr + 1− χ(γ ) dim M / 2+ O (γ )(|E (γ )|+ 1)

for all t1 , . . . , tk with tl +1 > . . . > tk , tlR+1 < tk , and tl +1 sufficiently small.
84                                                             KEVIN COSTELLO


     We are only interested in the region where tiR > tl +1 if 1 ≤ i ≤ l. Note that
                                                                                 ( χ(γ )− 1) dim M / 2−r − 1− O (γ )(|E (γ )|+ 1)
      kKti kr+1−χ(γ ) dim M/2+O(γ )(|E(γ )|+1) = O(ti                                                                               )
                                                                                 R−1 (( χ(γ )− 1) dim M / 2−r − 1− O (γ )(|E (γ )|+ 1))
                                                                       = O ( tl +1                                                        )
Since we can take R as large as we like, this contribution is small, and we find,

                                          Fi (tl +1 , . . . , tk )1/2 i
        fγ ( t1 , . . . , tk , α ) − ∑
                                                                                                           r(1− 1/ R)
                                                                            Ψ ′ ( t1 , . . . , tl , α ) < tl +1       kα kmr
                                          Gi ( t l + 1 , . . . , t k ) 1 / 2 γ /γ
for some mr ≫ 0.
                                                                             1/ R
   We want to integrate over the variables t1 , . . . , tl , in the region (tl +1 , T ). The integral
                                Z
                                                  1/ R
                                                               Ψγi /γ ′ (t1 , . . . , tl , α )dt1 · · · dtl
                                    t1 ,...,tl ∈( tl +1 ,T )

is approximated (by induction) using Theorem 15.5.2, applied to the graph γ /γ ′ , with
 1/ R
tl +1 playing the role of ε. It is easy to see that this yields the desired approximation of
φγ ,γ ′ (tl +1 , . . . , tk , α ).                                                        
                                                               ′
     Let γ ′ ⊂ γ be a subgraph. Let AγR,T ⊂ (0, T ) E(γ ) be the open subset where

                                teR > te′ if e ∈ E(γ ) \ E(γ ′ ) and e′ ∈ E(γ ′ )
                                teR < te′ if e, e′ ∈ E(γ ′ ).
This means that the lengths of the edges of the subgraph γ ′ are all around the same
size, and are all much smaller than the lengths of the other edges.
                                                                                                                                ′
15.7.4 Lemma. Fix R ≫ 0, and 0 < T < ∞. Then the closures of the regions Aγ 2k , where
                                                                                                                              R ,T
0 ≤ k ≤ | E(γ )| and γ ′ ⊂ γ is non-empty, cover (0, T ) E(γ ) . (The regions A R2k ,T appear as
AγR2k ,T , where γ is considered as a subgraph of itself).

Proof. Let {te } ∈ (0, T ) E(γ ) . As before, label the elements of E(γ ) by {1, 2, . . . , k}, in
such a way that t1 ≥ t2 ≥ · · · ≥ tk .
  Either t Rj ≥ tk for all j < k, or, there is a smallest i1 < k such that tiR1 ≤ tk . In the first
                                                                   ′
case, we are done, as then {te } ∈ AγR,T where γ ′ is the subgraph with the single edge
corresponding to tk .
  Suppose the second possibility holds. Then either for all j < i1 , t Rj ≥ ti1 , or there
                                                                                                                                              ′
exists a smallest i2 < i1 with tiR2 ≤ ti1 . In the first case, we’re done, as we are in AγR,T
where γ ′ is the subgraph whose edges correspond to ti1 , ti1 +1 , . . . , tk .
                                                                     2
  Again, let’s suppose the second possibility holds. Then tiR2 ≤ tiR1 ≤ tk . Either, for
                  2                                                          ′
all j < i2 , tRj ≥ ti2 , and then we are in AγR2 ,T where γ ′ is the subgraph whose edges
correspond to ti2 , ti2 +1 , . . . , tk .
                                                       2                4
   Otherwise, there is some smallest i3 < i2 with tiR3 ≤ ti2 . Then tiR3 ≤ tk . And so forth.
                   RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                                                               85


                                                                                                                   ′
   We eventually end up either finding ourselves in one of the regions Aγ 2k , for some
                                                                                                                  R ,T
non-empty proper subgraph γ ′ ⊂ γ, or we find some ik+1 = 1, so we are in Aγ 2k                                                       =
                                                                                                                              R ,T
A R2k ,T .                                                                                                                            

15.7.5 Definition. An open subset U of (0, T ) E(γ ) is called good if it is a subset of some
    ′                                                        n
AγR,T which is cut out by a finite number of inequalities teR > te′ , where l ∈ Z≥0 and both
e, e′ ∈ E(γ ′ ).

15.7.6 Lemma. The intersection of any two good regions is good.
  Now, we have seen that (ε, T ) E(γ ) is covered by the closures of a finite number of
good regions. Thus, we can write
                                                      Z
                             Fγ (ε, T, α ) =
                                                            (ε,T ) E(γ )
                                                                           fγ ( te , α )     ∏ dte
                                                                                           e ∈ E (γ )

as an alternating sum of integrals of fγ (te ) over U ∩ (ε, T ) E(γ ) , where U is a good
subset of (0, T ) E(γ ) . Thus, in order to understand the small ε asymptotic expansions
of Fγ (ε, T, α ), it suffices to consider the integrals of fγ over such regions.
15.7.7 Lemma. Let us fix R to be a (sufficiently large) integer.
  Let U ⊂ (0, T ) E(γ ) be a good subset. Then the integral
                                                      Z
                          Fγ ,U (ε, T, α ) =
                                                          U ∩(ε,T ) E(γ )
                                                                              fγ ( te , α )      ∏ dte
                                                                                              e ∈ E (γ )

admits a small ε asymptotic expansion
                                     Fγ ,U (ε, T, α ) ≃ ∑ φr (ε)Ψr ( T, α )
where φr ∈ A and Ψr : E ⊗ L(γ ) → Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ C ∞ ((0, T )) are continuous maps.
  Each Ψr ( T, α ) admits a small T asymptotic expansion
                                                                               Z
                                     Ψr ( T, α ) ≃ ∑ gk ( T )                          Φr,k (α )
                                                                                   M

where gk is a smooth function of T, and Φr,k ∈ PolyDiff (E ⊗ L(γ ) , Densities( M )) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d ).
Proof. This follows from Proposition 15.7.1 and Lemma 15.7.3.
  Indeed, we can assume (without loss of generality) that
    U ⊂ {t1 , . . . , tk | tiN > tl +1 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ l,                       tl +1 > tl +2 > · · · > tk ,           tlN+1 < tk }
is an open subset cut out by a finite number of inequalities of the form tia > t j , where
a ∈ Z>0 and l + 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k.
   Then let
                                     Z
                η(tl +1 , T, α ) =                                                              [
                                                             fγ (t1 , . . . , tk , α )dt1 · · · dt l + 1 · · · dtk .
                                         ( t1 ,...,tk )∈U

Here, we’re integrating over all variables except tl +1 .
86                                             KEVIN COSTELLO


  Then Proposition 15.7.1 (if l = 0) or Lemma 15.7.3 (if l > 0) imply that η(tl +1 , T, α )
has a nice tl +1 asymptotic expansion. More precisely, for all r ∈ Z>0 , there exist mr ∈
Z>0 , and a finite number of functions gi (tl +1 ), ψi ( T, α ), such that
   (1)
                     η(tl +1 , T, α ) − ∑ gi (tl +1 )ψi ( T, α ) < trl +
                                                                       +1
                                                                         1 kα k m r
     (2) the ψi are continuous linear maps ψi : E ⊗ L(γ ) → Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ C ∞ ((0, ∞)), which
         admit a small T asymptotic expansion
                                                                Z
                                   ψi ( T, α ) ∼ ∑ ζi,k ( T )           φi,k (α )
                                                                    M
           where
                         φi,k ∈ PolyDiff (E ⊗ L(γ ) , Densities ( M )) ⊗ Ω∗ (∆d )
           and ζi,k ( T ) are smooth functions of T.
     (3)
                                         Z 1
                                               gi (tl +1 )dtl +1 ∈ A
                                          ε
(The third part follows from the particular form of the terms of the expansions proved
in Proposition 15.7.1 and Lemma 15.7.3.)
   Now, it remains to integrate out the variable tl +1 . Let
                                 ηr (tl +1 , T, α ) = ∑ gi (tl +1 )ψi ( T, α )
                                  +1
be the approximation to order trl + 1 to η ( tl + 1 , T, α ).
  Then
     Z T           Z T                     Z T                Z 1          
         ηdtl +1 −      (η − ηr )dtl +1 +          ηr dtl +1 +     ηr dtl +1 < εr+2 kα kmr .
           ε               0                         1                     ε
Thus,
                          Z T                       Z T                    Z 1
                                (η − ηr )dtl +1 +         ηr dtl +1 +            ηr dtl +1
                            0                         1                     ε
gives the desired small ε asymptotic expansion. Note that the integral in the first
term converges. The first two terms are independent of ε, and the third term is in
A ⊗ Hom(E ⊗ L(γ ) , Ω∗ (∆d ) ⊗ C ∞ ((0, ∞))), as desired.
   It’s easy to check that the small T asymptotic expansion of the approximation above
is in terms of local functionals of α , as desired.
                                                                                    
    This completes the proof of Theorem 15.5.2.
    The proof of the variant result, when we include a propagator of the form P(ε, T ) +
δKε , is identical, except that instead of integrating over the smallest variable tk , we
specialise tk = ε. In our definition of the algebra A , we included functions of ε of the
form
                             Z
                                            F ( t1 , . . . , tk = ε) 1/ 2
                     f (ε) =                                              dt1 · · · dtk−1
                               U ⊂(ε,1) k−1 G ( t1 , . . . , tk = ε) 1/ 2

where F, G ∈ Z≥0 [t1 , . . . , tk ] and U is cut out by equations of the form tli > t j , for
i, j < k. Functions of this kind arise when we have a δKε term in the propagator.
                  RENORMALISATION AND THE BATALIN-VILKOVISKY FORMALISM                               87


                                            R EFERENCES
[AKSZ97] M. Alexandrov, M. Kontsevich, A. Schwarz and M. Zaboronsky, O. Kontsevich, The geome-
         try of the master equation and topological quantum field theory, Internat. J. Modern Phys. A
         12(7), 1405–1429 (1997), hep-th/9502010.
[AS92]   S. Axelrod and I. M. Singer, Chern-Simons perturbation theory, in Proceedings of the XXth
         International Conference on Differential Geometric Methods in Theoretical Physics, Vol. 1, 2
         (New York, 1991), pages 3–45, River Edge, NJ, 1992, World Sci. Publishing.
[AS94]   S. Axelrod and I. M. Singer, Chern-Simons perturbation theory. II, J. Differential Geom. 39(1),
         173–213 (1994).
[BEK06]  S. Bloch, H. Esnault and D. Kreimer, On motives associated to graph polynomials, Comm.
         Math. Phys. 267(1), 181–225 (2006), math.AG/0510011.
[BGM71] M. Berger, P. Gauduchon and E. Mazet, Le spectre d’une variété riemannienne, Lecture Notes
         in Mathematics, Vol. 194, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
[BGV92] N. Berline, E. Getzler and M. Vergne, Heat kernels and Dirac operators, volume 298 of
         Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical
         Sciences], Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992.
[BK72]   A. K. Bousfield and D. M. Kan, Homotopy limits, completions and localizations, Springer-
         Verlag, Berlin, 1972, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 304.
[BP57]   N. N. Bogoliubov and O. S. Parasiuk, On the Multiplication of the causal function in the
         quantum theory of fields, Acta Math. 97, 227–266 (1957).
[CF01]   A. S. Cattaneo and G. Felder, Poisson sigma models and deformation quantization, Modern
         Phys. Lett. A 16(4-6), 179–189 (2001), hep-th/0102208, Euroconference on Brane New World
         and Noncommutative Geometry (Torino, 2000).
[CK00]   A. Connes and D. Kreimer, Renormalization in quantum field theory and the Riemann-
         Hilbert problem. I. The Hopf algebra structure of graphs and the main theorem, Comm.
         Math. Phys. 210(1), 249–273 (2000).
[Cos06]  K. Costello,       Topological conformal field theories and gauge theories, (2006),
         math.QA/0605647.
[DGMS75] P. Deligne, P. Griffiths, J. Morgan and D. Sullivan, Real homotopy theory of Kähler mani-
         folds, Invent. Math. 29(3), 245–274 (1975).
[FM94]   W. Fulton and R. MacPherson, A compactification of configuration spaces, Ann. of Math. (2)
         139(1), 183–225 (1994).
[Hep66]  K. Hepp, Proof of the Bogolyubov-Parasiuk theorem on renormalization, Commun. Math.
         Phys. 2, 301–326 (1966).
[Kon94]  M. Kontsevich, Feynman diagrams and low-dimensional topology, in First European Con-
         gress of Mathematics, Vol. II (Paris, 1992), volume 120 of Progr. Math., pages 97–121,
         Birkhäuser, Basel, 1994.
[Kon03]  M. Kontsevich, Deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds, Lett. Math. Phys. 66(3),
         157–216 (2003), q-alg/9709040.
[May92]  J. P. May, Simplicial objects in algebraic topology, Chicago Lectures in Mathematics, Univer-
         sity of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1992, Reprint of the 1967 original.
[Mne06]  P. Mnev, Notes on simplicial BF theory, (2006), hep-th/0610326.
[MP49]   S. Minakshisundaram and Å. Pleijel, Some properties of the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-
         operator on Riemannian manifolds, Canadian J. Math. 1, 242–256 (1949).
[MS67]   H. P. McKean, Jr. and I. M. Singer, Curvature and the eigenvalues of the Laplacian, J. Differ-
         ential Geometry 1(1), 43–69 (1967).
[MZ96]   M. Martellini and M. Zeni, The BF formalism for Yang-Mills theory and the ‘t Hooft algebra,
         (1996), hep-th/9610090.
[Sch93]  A. Schwarz, Geometry of Batalin-Vilkovisky quantization, Comm. Math. Phys. 155(2), 249–
         260 (1993), hep-th/9205088.
[Wit04]  E. Witten, Perturbative gauge theory as a string theory in twistor space, Comm. Math. Phys.
         252(1-3), 189–258 (2004), hep-th/0312171.
88                                     KEVIN COSTELLO


[Zim69]     W. Zimmermann, Convergence of Bogoliubov’s method of renormalization in momentum
            space, Comm. Math. Phys. 15, 208–234 (1969).

     D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , N ORTHWESTERN U NIVERSITY
     E-mail address: costello@math.northwestern.edu
