                                                                                                               HUTP-98/A070
                                                                                                               hep-th/9812127




                                                   M-Theory and Topological Strings–II




arXiv:hep-th/9812127v1 15 Dec 1998
                                                               Rajesh Gopakumar 1 and Cumrun Vafa 2

                                                                     Lyman Laboratory of Physics
                                                                         Harvard University
                                                                        Cambridge, MA 02138


                                           It is shown how the topological string amplitudes encode the BPS structure of wrapped
                                     M2 branes in M-theory compactification on Calabi-Yau threefolds. This in turn is related
                                     to a twisted supersymmetric index in 5 dimensions which receives contribution only from
                                     BPS states. The spin dependence of BPS states in 5 dimensions is captured by the string
                                     coupling constant dependence of topological string amplitudes.




                                     December 1998
                                       1
                                           gopakumr@tomonaga.harvard.edu
                                       2
                                           vafa@string.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

     Topological string theories [1] are among the most beautiful and simple string theories.
In particular in connection with target space being Calabi-Yau 3-folds they have a rich
structure. Their definition (in the A-model) involves summing over holomorphic maps from
worldsheets to the Calabi-Yau 3-fold. In this sense, they seem to be related to counting
some BPS 2-brane states, such as M2/D2 branes in M/IIA compactifications on Calabi-Yau
threefold. A natural question is to find the precise connection between the BPS content
involving M2/D2 branes and the topological string amplitudes. One aim of the present
paper is to make this connection more precise. The key ingredient in this connection is the
reinterpretation of topological string amplitudes on Calabi-Yau threefolds as computing
particular F-terms in N = 2 supersymmetric theories in 4 dimensions [2][3]. Our basic
strategy is to find the contribution of BPS states to F-terms and thus read off the BPS
content of topological string amplitudes. Some steps in this direction had already been
taken in [4][5][6].
     This paper is a continuation of our previous paper [7] where we considered the contri-
bution of the simplest BPS states to the topological string amplitudes. In that paper it was
useful to view the D2 brane BPS content of Type IIA on Calabi-Yau 3-fold, from M-theory
perspective compactified on the same Calabi-Yau times a circle. The momentum modes
around the circle were crucial in reading off from the M2 brane spectrum, the structure of
D2/D0 brane contribution. Similarly in this paper, we find that the M-theory perspective
is useful. In fact this link is even more important in connection with the present paper: It
turns out that off shell quantum field content of BPS states in type IIA string is necessary
in order to evaluate their contribution to topological string amplitudes. On the other hand
the D2 brane bound state quantum numbers do not yield the corresponding off shell quan-
tum field. Whereas, the M2 brane on shell state, will give rise to the corresponding off
shell field in 4 dimensions. It is this link between M-theory and type IIA BPS states which
proves crucial for connecting topological string amplitudes to BPS structure of M-theory
on CY threefold. Along the way we introduce a generalized supersymmetric index in 5
dimensions, somewhat analogous to similar objects introduced in 2 dimensions [8], which
captures the BPS content of the theory.
     The organization of the paper is as follows: In section 2 we show how to compute the
contribution of a single BPS state in 4 dimensional compactification of type IIA strings to
topological string amplitudes. This turns out to be a straightforward one loop computation

                                              1
generalizing Schwinger’s computation to this setup. In section 3 we connect the M-theory
content of BPS states with those of type IIA and use that to rewrite the topological string
amplitudes in terms of BPS content of M-theory in 5 dimensions. This section contains
the main result of this paper. In section 4 we show how in some cases one can compute
the BPS spectrum explicitly, by studying M2/D2 branes wrapped over a genus g Riemann
surface in Calabi-Yau.


2. Schwinger Re-interpretation of Topological String Amplitudes

      Topological A-model string amplitude at genus g roughly speaking computes the
weighted sum over holomorphic maps from a Riemann surface of genus g to a Calabi-
Yau threefold:
                                                X
                                 Fg (ti ) =               exp(−2πA)
                                              Hol.Maps.
              P
where A =         ni ti denotes the area of the surface in the Calabi-Yau M relative to a
(complexified) Kahler form parameterized by ti in terms of a choice of H2 (M ) and ni
denotes the H2 class of the image. The sum over the holomorphic curves in the above
is sometimes replaced by an appropriate integral when there are families of holomorphic
                                                                                   2 2g−2
curves. The topological string amplitudes compute corrections of the form Fg (ti )R+ F+
in type IIA compactifications on a Calabi-Yau [2][3], where R+ and F+ denote the self-dual
parts of Riemann and graviphoton field strengths3 . It is natural to consider giving vev to
F+ = F and denoting gs F = λ. Then the topological string partition function defined as
                                                  X
                                   F (λ, ti ) =        λ2g−2 Fg (ti )
                                                  g

                                                                 2
can be viewed as computing the correction of the form F (λ, ti )R+ in type IIA compactifi-
cation on a Calabi-Yau threefold.
      It is well known that these amplitudes do not receive any further perturbative or even
non-perturbative string correction beyond genus g (due to the decoupling of the dilaton,
which is in a hypermultiplet, from kahler moduli which are in vector multiplets). Thus
one can evaluate them at strong coupling, in which case one would expect the dominant
  3
      This is strictly speaking valid for g > 0, however our expressions continue to be valid also
for g = 0 when they are appropriately interpreted as computing prepotential terms in the corre-
sponding N = 2 theory.

                                                   2
contribution to come from light D-brane bound states. Moreover, due to the fact that it
is an F-type term, one expects this to receive contribution only from BPS states involving
D-branes. In the limit of a large volume Calabi-Yau, the relevant D-brane states would
be D2 branes wrapped around cycles, bound to D0 branes. The effect of integrating these
fields out should be to reproduce the above amplitude. Given the minimal couplings of
these fields to supergravity multiplets, one is thus reduced to doing a one loop computation
with bound states of D-branes going around the loop with emission of graviphoton and
graviton fields.
     It is crucial to note that the contribution of the fields at one loop will depend on their
off-shell quantum fields (see e.g. [9]). In particular knowing the SO(4) = SU (2)L ×SU (2)R
Lorentz group content of the fields is necessary. An N = 2 BPS state is represented by a
field content of the form
                                1                  X
                              [( , 0) ⊕ 2(0, 0)] ⊗      Nj1 ,j2 (j1 , j2 )
                                2                  j ,j1   2


for some integers Nj1 ,j2 . Before computing the contribution of such states, let us note
what it could depend on. First of all, we can compute the contribution for each (j1 , j2 )
and add the total result weighted with Nj1 ,j2 to get the final result. In addition to its mass
(or more precisely the BPS central term Z), the SU (2)R content of the fields should be
                                    2 2g−2
irrelevant for the contribution to R+ F+   amplitudes. The reason for this is that R+ and
F+ by definition only couple to the SU (2)L quantum number. In other words, only the
degeneracy and fermi/bose statistics is relevant in computing the contribution of SU (2)R
                                                      P
quantum numbers. Thus, the relevant contribution is j2 (−1)2j2 (2j2 + 1)Nj1 ,j2 times the
contribution of the state with left-spin [( 21 ) + 2(0)] ⊗ [j1 ].
     As in [7], the Schwinger one-loop calculation for a particle in a background constant
electromagnetic field, will be a surprisingly powerful way of determining the structure of
higher genus topological partition functions Fg . This is natural in view of the fact noted
above that the topological string partition function arises naturally by considering constant
self-dual field strength for the graviphoton field. Let us first recall Schwinger’s computa-
tion. Schwinger (see for example [10]) studied the case of a particle minimally coupled to a
constant background electromagnetic field. Using the proper time formalism, the resulting
determinant (a one loop contribution) can be explicitly evaluated. For instance, the free
energy of a charged scalar (of mass m) in a constant self-dual field of magnitude F is
                       Z ∞                      Z
                            ds    −s(△+m2 )   1 ∞ ds        1       −sm2
                  F=           Tre          =                     e      .           (2.1)
                        ǫ    s                4 ǫ    s sinh2 seF
                                                               2

                                                   3
                                         eF
Note that F can be expanded in powers of m 2 – the only dimensionless combination. These

terms are the quantum corrections to Maxwell’s action due to the presence of charged
                                                                                                  2
particles. There are in addition, non-perturbative pieces which go like exp− m
                                                                             eF
                                                                                .
    When the charged particle carries non-trivial spin, then the answer is modified to
        Z ∞                                                  Z ∞
                ds                2           1                        ds     1         2
   F=              Tr(−1)F e−s(△+m +2eJ·F ) =                                 2 seF
                                                                                    e−sm Tr(−1)F e−2seJ·F .
            ǫ    s                            4                  ǫ      s sinh 2
                                                                                                         (2.2)
where J = JR + JL is the generator of spin angular momentum J · F ≡ Jµν F µν .
    What does all this have to do with topological string amplitudes? As we mentioned,
                             2 2g−2
we are really computing the R+ F+   terms in the four dimensional effective action. As
argued earlier, these should be given by a one loop computation where we integrate out
D0/D2 branes. This seems like a generalization of the Schwinger computation to the case
where one has both background electromagnetic and metric fields. In other words, we want
the R2 term in a heat kernel expansion in this background. This can be quite tedious.
Fortunately, the answer turns out to be simple due to supersymmetry. Basically, what we
find is that the effect of N = 2 supersymmetry is to convert the Schwinger’s computation
for the vacuum amplitude in the presence of constant electromagnetic field strength in the
non-supersymmetric case, to the correction for R2 in the supersymmetric case.
    For instance, in the case of an isolated S 2 , lightest states at strong coupling, other
than the 0-branes, are wrapped 2-branes. The 0-branes as well as the S 2 wrapped 2-
brane are BPS states in the [( 21 , 0) ⊕ 2(0, 0)] representation of the Lorentz group SO(4) =
                                                                2 2g−2
SU (2)×SU (2). The contribution of such a hypermultiplet to Fg R+ F+   is exactly that of
a charged scalar to F+2g−2 in the ordinary Schwinger computation [11]. Roughly speaking,
the fermionic contribution compensates for the extra insertions of the curvature.
    Thus the contribution of such a hypermultiplet to Fg is that in (2.1) (note that here
|Z| = |m| = e, where Z is the central term in the N = 2 algebra)

                         X                               Z ∞
                                                     1               ds    1         Z
                               (F gs )   2g−2
                                                Fg =                        2 sF
                                                                                 e−s gs .                (2.3)
                         g=0
                                                     4       ǫ        s sinh 2

which gives
                                                Fg = −χg Z 2−2g                                          (2.4)

where χg = χ(Mg ) is the euler characteristic of the moduli space of genus g Riemann
surfaces.

                                                         4
     Though this was evaluated in a heterotic computation in [11] the final answer was
extracted in a field theory limit. This will help us to get the contribution of a general
N=2 BPS state. Since the stringy one loop computation had particles of arbitrary spin
                                                                      2 2g−2
inside the loop, we can also extract the respective contributions to R+ F+ . We might
                                                                            2 2g−2
guess from our experience with the hypermultiplet that the contribution to R+ F+   from
a state with spin [( 21 , 0) ⊕ 2(0, 0)] ⊗ [(j1 , j2 )] is the same as that to F+2g−2 from a particle
of spin [(j1 , j2 )] from a Schwinger computation. This will prove to be right.
     Even though one can do a Schwinger computation at one loop in a field theory setup, it
turns out that the one loop heterotic setup is more convenient. As already mentioned, this
computation has already been done in [11]. The fermionic zero modes at one loop absorb
the R2 fermion vertex fields and the effect of having a constant self dual graviphoton field
strength is to modify the spacetime contribution to quadratic bosonic path integral on a
torus with modulus τ (Eq. 4.13 in [11])
                            RQ          i   i             F
                                                                  R
                                                               1¯ 2    2¯ 1 2
                              i=1,2 DZ iD Z̄ exp(−S +     τ2 (Z ∂Z + Z̄ ∂ Z̄ )d σ)
            G(F, τ, τ̄) =                 RQ
                                                     i     i
                                             i=1,2 DZ iD Z̄ exp(−S)
                                                                                              (2.5)
                            2πiF η̄ 3 2      πF 2
                       =(                  ) exp(−            )
                            Θ̄1 (F, τ̄ )             τ2

Here Z i ’s are complex bosonic fields representing spacetime variables with the usual free
field action denoted by S. And F as before, is the expectation value of the background
self-dual electromagnetic field. Θ1 is the Jacobi theta function.
     This formula has a straightforward Hamiltonian interpretation which can be read off
from the path integral in (2.5). The λ dependent term is that from a self-dual electro-
magnetic field in the four dimensions labelled by Z 1 , Z 2 . This can also be seen from the
answer in the second line of Eq.(2.5) which can be written as
                                            Q
                       πF                      n=1 (1  − q n )4                     πF 2
  G(F, τ, τ̄) = F (          ) Q
                              2
                                          2πiF q n )2
                                                      Q          −2πiF q n )2
                                                                              exp(−      )    (2.6)
                    sin(πF )    n=1 (1 − e             n=1 (1 − e                    τ2

(In comparing with the conventions we are using we should make the replacement F →
 F
2πi .)   In [11] only the first term was extracted as the contribution of a hypermultiplet
which we saw in Eqn(2.3) . But now it is easy to read off the contribution of higher spins.
Note that the spin content of an elementary BPS state in the heterotic string comes from
ground state oscillators on the right-moving sector (the supersymmetric side) tensored with
a tower of left-moving bosonic oscillators. In particular the spacetime quantum numbers

                                                          5
of fields will come from the left-moving bosonic oscillators. These consist of four bosonic
oscillators αµ−n each of which transforms according to [ 21 , 21 ] representation of SO(4). Given
the fact that we have turned on only F = F+ , it is easy to see that the the denominator
in the second term indicates the Tr exp(−τ L0 + 2JL3 F+ ) structure for the bosonic string
oscillators.
                                 2
     So the contribution to the R+ term from a general particle is given by the generaliza-
tion of Eqn.(2.3)

                 X                                                   Z ∞            L
                        2                          2 1                     ds tre−2sJ3 F −s gZ
                       R+ (gs F )2g−2 Fg = (−1)2j R+                                    e s.     (2.7)
                 g=0
                                                                 4   ǫ      s sinh2 sF
                                                                                     2


where j = jL + jR . Since gs F always appears in a single combination, we will henceforth
denote the product by λ. We will also rescale s in all the Schwinger integrands to write it
solely in terms of λ.
     It is simple to use this to evaluate the contribution from a particle of a given spin. One
just carries out the sum over the helicities signified by the trace. As already noted, only
the left spin content of the multiplet is relevant for this contribution. It will turn out to be
convenient to write down the contribution from the supersymmetric multiplet whose left
spin content is given by I1 ⊗ Ir ≡ [( 21 ) + 2(0)] ⊗ [( 21 ) ⊕ 2(0)]r . The trace over the helicities
comes out simply to be (−4)r sinh2r 2s (For r = 1 one has for example (2 − e−2s − e2s ).
Thus the contribution of Ir is given by

                       X
                       ∞                          Z ∞
                                                        ds        s            Z
                             2g−2
                             λ      Fg (Z) =               (2isinh )2r−2 exp(−s ).               (2.8)
                       g=0                         ǫ     s        2            λ

From this we see that Ir contributes only to the topological partition function Fg at genus
g ≥ r. Moreover, the Ir have the utility of serving as a convenient basis for decompos-
ing any supersymmetric multiplet – a multiplet with maximum spin j can be written as
Pr=2j
  r=0 αr Ir for some (possibly negative) integers αr . (Also note that Ir ⊗ Is = Ir+s .)

     The contribution to the topological partition function from such a multiplet then takes
the form
                 X
                 ∞                          X
                                            r=2j        Z ∞
                        2g−2                                    ds        s            Z
                       λ         Fg (Z) =          αr              (2isinh )2r−2 exp(−s ).       (2.9)
                 g=0                        r=0         ǫ        s        2            λ


                                                            6
3. 5 dimensional interpretation

    In the previous section we have seen how a BPS state in type IIA compactification
on CY 3-fold contributes to topological string amplitudes. We also saw that the off shell
SO(4) Lorentz quantum numbers of the field describing the BPS states is necessary to
find its contribution. This assignment of off shell states, which sounds unnatural for four
dimensional Hilbert space, is quite natural from the perspective of M-theory Hilbert space.
Recall that type IIA compactified on a CY 3-fold at strong coupling can be viewed as M-
theory compactified on CY 3-fold times a circle S 1 . The bound states of D2 branes and
D0 branes can be viewed in this set up as M2 branes wrapped around cycles of Calabi-Yau
threefold, together with a momentum around S 1 . Thus the spectrum of relevant BPS
states should come, from the M-theory perspective, by simply studying the BPS spectrum
of M2 branes wrapped around cycles of Calabi-Yau threefold. Note that the rotation group
in five dimensions is SO(4). Thus the BPS states will have quantum numbers in terms
of it. This will also yield, upon compactification on S 1 the off-shell field content of the
corresponding 4-dimensional state.
    Let us then consider M-theory compactification on Calabi-Yau threefold. Consider

                        I(α, β) = Tr(−1)2jL +2jR exp(−αJ3L − βH)

where the trace is over all massive one particle states at zero center of mass momentum.
The supercharges of N = 2 theories in d = 5 decompose under SO(4) spatial rotation
group according to 2( 21 , 0) + 2(0, 21 ). The Hilbert space forms various representations
according to the action of supercharges: the long multiplets and the short multiplets
which are the BPS states. The long multiplets are not killed by any of the supercharges,
whereas the BPS multiplets are killed either by the 2( 21 , 0) supercharges or 2(0, 21 ). Thus
the long multiplets do not contribute to the above trace due to the (−1)2jR term. Only
the BPS states which are annihilated by 2(0, 12 ) survive in the above trace. In this sense
this is a “supersymmetric index” which receive contribution only from BPS states, in the
same sense as Tr(−1)F F exp(−βH) considered in [8] in connection with BPS states of
N = 2 supersymmetric theories in 2 dimensions. Note that this index is in particular
independent of deformation of complex structure of Calabi-Yau threefold. For a given
BPS state the masses depend only on the Kahler class of the Calabi-Yau metric, and so
the only dependence could come from jumps. In fact it is known that when one changes
the complex structure of Calabi-Yau there could be new BPS states (in other words the

                                              7
spectrum of bound M2 branes changes). However the change must be such that the new
states created or destroyed under this operation collect themselves into long multiplets that
thus do not contribute to the above index. In other words, the spectrum of BPS states
by itself will change as one changes the complex structure of the Calabi-Yau, without
changing the above index. In this sense, this is the more natural object to hope to be able
to compute. Note that the existence of the above index is related to the fact that (only) in
5 dimensions rotating black hole configurations which preserve supersymmetry can exist
[12].
        In application to topological string it is convenient to characterize the contribution
of BPS states to the above index as follows: Consider the BPS states with a fixed central
            PH2 (M )
charge, A = i=1      ni ti where ni denotes the wrapping class of an M2 brane in H2 (M )
relative to a basis and ti denotes the integral of the Kahler class on the corresponding class.
The mass of the corresponding wrapped M2 brane (in our normalization) is M = 2πA.
Consider the totality of all BPS states with central charge A. Note that if (ni ) are not
relatively prime this also includes BPS states coming from multiwrapped M2 branes. We
arrange the totality of such BPS states in class (ni ) according to their SO(4) spin content:
                                                              X           (n )
                                    [( 21 , 0) ⊕ 2(0, 0)] ⊗            Nj1 ,ji 2 (j1 , j2 )
                                                              j1 ,j2


Their relevant contribution to the above index is captured by just keeping track of the
total degeneracy of the right rotation group while keeping the representation for the left
rotation group:
                           X                                  (n )
                                                                                 X
                                    (−1)2j2 (2j2 + 1)Nj1 ,ji 2 [j1 ] =               α(n
                                                                                      r
                                                                                        i)
                                                                                           Ir     (3.1)
                           j1 ,j2

where we have written the left-spin content in terms of Ir = ([ 21 ] + 2[0])r , which is a
                                                       (n )
convenient basis. In this way of writing αr i may be positive or negative integers. The
                                                                                                (n )
quantity which will appear in the topological string amplitudes are the integers αr i for
each class (ni ) and each integer r ≥ 0.
        In going down from 5 to 4 dimensions on S 1 each BPS state can have in addition an
arbitrary momentum m around the circle. In particular each of them lead to a BPS state
                                                                    P
in four dimensions with central charge Z = 2π(A + im) where A =        ni ti . Using the
contribution of a single BPS state in 4 dimensions with central charge Z to the topological
string amplitude (2.9), and doing a redefinition of topological string coupling constant

                                                         8
λ → iλ to make it consistent with the conventional topological definitions, we see that we
can rewrite the full topological string amplitude as
                       X            Z ∞
                              (ni )     ds      s             s X
            F (λ) =         αr             (2sin )2r−2 exp[−2π (  ni ti + im)]
                                     ǫ   s      2             λ
                      (ni ),r,m

Rewriting the sum over m using the identity
                          X               s X s
                              exp(−2πim ) =  δ( − k)
                           m
                                          λ    λ
                                                           k
allows one to do the integral over s and we obtain our final formula for the topological
string amplitude
                                  X              1       kλ 2r−2           X
                 F (λ) =                   α(n
                                            r
                                              i)
                                                   (2sin    )    exp[−2πk(   ni ti )]          (3.2)
                                                 k        2
                           (ni ),r≥0,k>0
                                                                                        (n )
This formula encodes all the integrality properties of F (λ) in terms of αr i which are
integers. Moreover it suggests that we should view these numbers as the fundamental
invariants that topological string captures. It has been known that using mirror symmetry
one can essentially compute topological string amplitudes [2]. However for every genus g
there are a finite number of undetermined coefficients which need to be fixed first. The
integrality properties of (3.2) is a powerful constraint in determining these coefficients and
completely computing topological string amplitudes, as has been recently demonstrated in
[13]. We will now explore some of the properties of the expression (3.2) for the topological
string partition function.
    We first wish to comment on the usefulness of the basis we have chosen to write the
                                                    (n )
BPS states (3.1). The first fact is that αr i do not contribute to Fg for g < r. In other
words, up to a fixed genus, only a finite number of r’s contribute. The next point is that
                       (n )
the contribution of αr i to Fg for g ≥ r is of the form
                                        X
                             α(n
                              r
                                i)
                                   Cr,g    k 2g−3 exp(−2πkA)                                   (3.3)
                                                k
            P
where A =       ni ti and Cr,g are some universal rational numbers (involving Bernoulli num-
bers). Moreover, Cg,g = 1. This implies that if we have computed topological string
                                                                           (n )
amplitudes up to a given genus g, we can inductively extract all αr i for r ≤ g. In partic-
ular we can subtract out the contribution of lower g topological string amplitudes Fr with
                                  (n )
r < g from Fg and extract αg i from Fg . This encodes all the bubbling and multicovering
structure that one should anticipate for topological string amplitudes. The connection
between multi-covering for genus zero topological string amplitude and its M-theory in-
terpretation was already pointed out in [14]. The formula (3.3) applies to contribution of
non-zero (ni ). The case with (ni ) = 0 has already been considered in [7][15][16].

                                                       9
4. M2 branes wrapped around genus g surfaces in CY

    We have seen that topological string amplitudes can be rewritten in terms of BPS
degeneracies of M2 branes wrapped around Calabi-Yau 2-cycles. In particular the numbers
 (n )
αr i , which can be used to rewrite the topological string amplitudes according to (3.2),
capture the SU (2)L content of M2 BPS states in the H2 class given by ni . In this section
                                                                        (n )
we would like to study how in principle one would compute αr i by considering M2 branes
wrapped around a genus g curve in the Calabi-Yau 3-fold. It is also convenient to consider
the related problem of studying the D2 brane bound states.
    The worldvolume of a single M2 brane consists of 8 scalars transforming as a vector
representation of SO(8) R-symmetry group, and 8 fermions, transforming as [s ⊗ 8s ] where
s denotes the 3-dimensional spinor, and 8s denotes the spinor of SO(8) R-symmetry group.
The SO(8) group is the rotation symmetry normal to the M2 brane worldvolume. Consider
wrapping the M2 brane around a genus g curve Σg in a Calabi-Yau 3-fold. Then the SO(8)
is naturally decomposed as


                                 SOJ (4) × SON (4) ⊂ SO(8)                             (4.1)


where we can identify SOJ (4) as the rotation subgroup of the Lorentz group in 5 di-
mensional spacetime, and SON (4) as the rotation group normal to the M2 brane in the
Calabi-Yau threefold. We can decompose the SO(8) spinor according to the breakup (4.1)


                       8s → [( 21 , 0)J ⊗ ( 21 , 0)N ] ⊕ [(0, 12 )J ⊗ (0, 21 )N ]      (4.2)


where for each SO(4) = SU (2)L × SU (2)R group we have used (p, q) to denote the corre-
sponding SU (2) representations. Being inside a Kahler manifold means that the SO(4)N
holonomy resides in a U (2) subgroup, U (1)L × SU (2)R ⊂ SU (2)L         R
                                                               N × SU (2)N . The tangent

bundle of Calabi-Yau, splits over Σg to


                                         TCY → TΣg ⊕ N                                 (4.3)


where N is a U (2) bundle over Σg . Moreover, the fact that the first Chern-class of Calabi-
Yau is zero, means that the determinant bundle U (1)L ⊂ U (2) is the same as TΣ∗g , the
cotangent bundle on Σg .

                                                  10
     The fields on the worldvolume of M2 brane are twisted because of the non-trivial
embedding in the Calabi-Yau [17]. Consider in particular the fermions. Before the twisting
they transform under SO(3) × [SO(4)J × (U (1)L × SU (2)R )] as

                            [s, [(0, 12 )J ⊗ (0, 21 )] ⊕ [( 21 , 0)J ⊗ (±1, 0)]]

If we consider the worldvolume of M2 brane to be Σg × S 1 , this twisting is basically
adding a contribution of U (1)N
                              L charge to the holonomy. Since this is related to the U (1)
spin connection on the Riemann surface, due to (4.3), it follows that the fermions on the
Riemann surface consist of the following:

                  ±1
           ψ→[       , [(0, 12 )J ⊗ ( 21 )]] ⊕ [2(0), ( 21 , 0)J ⊗ (0)] ⊕ [(±1), ( 21 , 0)J ⊗ (0)]   (4.4)
                  2

where the above quantum numbers denote the helicity on the surface, the SO(4)J quantum
number and the SU (2)R                                       N
                     N quantum number respectively (the U (1)L has been combined with
the modified spin). The 8 scalars on M2, which before twisting transform according to

                            [0, [( 21 , 12 )J ⊗ (0, 0)] ⊕ [(0, 0)J ⊗ (±1, 21 )]]

after twisting transform according to

                                                             ±1
                             [0, [( 21 , 21 )J ⊗ (0)]] ⊕ [      , (0, 0)J ⊗ ( 21 )]                  (4.5)
                                                             2

     In finding the bound states, we need to quantize the zero modes in the above theory.
Four zero modes for the scalars, corresponding to [0, [( 21 , 12 )J ⊗ (0)]] in (4.5) correspond to
                                                                                         1
the four momenta in 4+1 dimensions. The other scalars transforming as [ ±1
                                                                         2 , (0, 0)J ⊗ ( 2 )]
are paired with fermions with the same internal quantum numbers. If there are zero
modes for these directions, they will correspond to deformations of Σg in the threefold.
Let us call the corresponding moduli space M. Because of the pairing of the fermions
with the bosons, this will give us a supersymmetric sigma model on M. Note that the
SOJ (4) quantum numbers of these fermions are in (0, 21 ). In particular the SL(2) lefshetz
action on the cohomology elements of the Kahler manifold M should be identified with the
right SU (2) subgroup of SOJ (4). Finally there are the zero modes coming from the extra
fermions which transform as scalars and 1-forms on the genus g curve ( [2(0), ( 21 , 0)J ⊗
(0)] ⊕ [(±1), ( 21 , 0)J ⊗ (0)]). If the genus g surface is non-degenerate there will be g + 1

                                                      11
such zero modes. Quantizing them gives rise to the representation whose SOJ (4) quantum
numbers are given by
                                     [( 21 , 0) + 2(0, 0)]g+1

Note in particular, that the SU (2)L content of this representation is exactly the same as
the convenient basis we discussed before, namely a half hypermultiplet tensored with Ig .
    If throughout the moduli space M the Riemann surface remains non-degenerate, the
SOJ (4) quantum numbers of BPS bound states will be given by

                                                          X
                                                          d/2
                           [( 21 , 0) + 2(0, 0)]g+1 ⊗ (         aj [(0, j)])
                                                          j=0


where the complex dimension of M is denoted by d and aj are determined from the SL(2)
decomposition. In particular, the contribution of this family to Fg will be the same as the
contribution of (−1)d χ(M)Ig , as the quantum number of the right SU (2) is counted only
as far as its Z2 quantum number (−1)2jr is concerned. In other words, in this case we
would have
                                    αr = δg,r (−1)d χ(M)

This result in particular means that an isolated genus g curve contributes to all Fk for
k ≥ g according to (3.2). This result has also been independently derived recently from
the mathematical definition of topological strings [18].
    However quite frequently the moduli space M will consist of loci where the genus g
surface has shrunk to a genus r ≤ g for some r. In such cases, even though in principle
one can continue by studying the M-theory description of M2 bound states, it turns out to
be also useful to view it from the type IIA perspective, by going down on a circle. This is
also useful for the count of M2 brane bound states. As far as the total count of M2 BPS
states, we can use the type IIA computation, as it is radius independent. However we will
have to also recover the SU (2)L quantum number of states, which requires additional care
discussed below.

4.1. The Type IIA Perspective

    The worldvolume theory for a single D2 brane is the same as that of M2 brane except
that instead of 8 scalars, one has 7 scalars and one U (1) gauge field, which is dual to the
8-th scalar; this is a reflection of duality between scalars and vectors in 3 dimensions. As
far as constructing bound states and counting zero modes of wrapped D2 branes, the story

                                               12
is essentially the same as that of M2 brane, except that now we have only 3 bosonic zero
modes, corresponding to spatial translation in 3 directions. The effects of the momentum
in the 4-th direction is now replaced by the number of D0-branes bound to the D2 brane,
which in turn is given by the quantum of flux of the U (1) field strength on the Riemann
surface. Since the choice of the flux does not affect the degeneracy of the bound states we
will recover the fourth momentum in this way. There is, however, one extra simplification:
Now the extra U (1) gauge field will have zero modes on a genus g surface Σ and in fact
will pair up with the unpaired fermionic zero mode in the M2 brane description. In other
words, the moduli space M of deformations of Σ in the Calabi-Yau, is now replaced by
M̂, which is the moduli space of deformations of Σ together with a choice of a flat U (1)
connection on Σ. We thus have a fiber space

                                           M̂ → M

with fiber which is generically T 2g . Moreover, the number of bound states in this formu-
lation is in 1-1 correspondence with the cohomology of M̂. The spacetime rotation group
is SO(3) in this case and the SO(3) quantum numbers of the D2 brane bound states can
be read off by the Lefshetz SL(2) action on the cohomologies of M̂. Note that this SO(3)
is the diagonal SU (2) in SU (2)L × SU (2)R and we would need to read off this further
decomposition from this data.
      The basic idea to read off this decomposition of cohomology is to recall that SU (2)L
refers to the cohomology in the torus direction (the Jacobian) and the SU (2)R refers to
the cohomology in the base direction. Let us denote the base by M. The cohomology of
M̂ decomposed taking into account this decomposition to SU (2)L × SU (2)R will consist
of:
                           Ig ⊗ Rg + Ig−1 ⊗ Rg−1 + ... + I0 ⊗ R0

where Ig is the left representation defined before: Ik = [( 12 ) + 2(0)]k , and Rk are the right
representation which couple to the left Ik . These will of course depend on the M̂ and its
fibration structure. The fact that the highest rank I appearing above is Ig follows from
the fact that highest differential form coming from T 2g will have this spin.
      The contribution of this configuration to topological string amplitudes will be given
by αr with r = 0, ..., g where
                                         αk = χ(Rk )

                                              13
and χ(Rk ) refers to the sum of the dimension of SU (2)R representations in Rk weighted
with (−1)2jR . These already imply the following facts: If we consider the Euler charac-
teristic of M̂ we immediately learn using χ(Ik ⊗ Rk ) = χ(Ik ) ⊗ χ(Rk ) and χ(Ik ) = δk,0
that:
                                                    ˆ
                                       α0 = (−1)d χ(M̂)                                     (4.6)

where dˆ is the complex dimension of M̂. In other words, the contribution to genus zero
of a family of holomorphic curves is given (up to sign) by the Euler characteristic of the
moduli space of the curve together with the Jacobian on it. This fact had already been
used in particular to compute the Euler characteristic of moduli space of instantons on
1
2 K3 [19] as well as resolve a puzzle in connection with the counting of black hole entropy
in compactification of M-theory on Calabi-Yau threefolds [20]. For some other applications
of this result see also the recent discussion in [21]. It is also in line with the observations in
[22] that the euler characteristic of a Jacobian variety will localize on nodal rational curve,
as one would expect from a contribution to the genus zero topological string amplitude F0 .
    The structure of Rg is also easy to predict: The fact that the top cohomology of
torus makes invariant sense, implies that the left spin [g] state will be accompanied by the
full cohomology of the base. In other words Rg can be obtained by considering the base
manifold M and its SL(2) decomposition. This in particular implies that

                                       αg = (−1)d χ(M)

where d is the complex dimension of M. In the case of g = 1 these two ingredients suffice to
find the decomposition of the SU (2) action on the cohomology of M̂. For g > 1 one would
need to decompose the M̂ into the cohomology of the fiber (or a sheaf theory extension of
it) times that of the base. While this is standard mathematics (known as Leray spectral
sequence [23]) the fact that the SU (2) action on the fiber continues to make sense on this
decomposition has not been considered previously. Physically we are predicting that this
should be possible because of the fact that the SU (2)L × SU (2)R quantum numbers of the
cohomology have well defined meanings from the M-theory perspective on a Calabi-Yau
threefold. It would be interesting to verify this mathematically.
    It is useful to give an example of how things work. We present an example which was
pointed out to us by Sheldon Katz: Consider a P2 in a Calabi-Yau threefold. Consider
the contribution to F0 from primitive degree 3 curves. This has generically genus 1. In
this case the M is P9 . Moreover M̂ can be studied by viewing it as follows: A flat bundle

                                               14
on T 2 can be identified with a point p on the dual torus. Consider the image of the point
p ∈ P2 . The moduli space of elliptic curves passing through that point is P8 . Thus M̂ in
this case can be viewed as a P8 bundle over P2 . The cohomology of this space is the same
as the product of the cohomology of P2 and P8 . From what we said before we thus learn
the SU (2)L × SU (2)R decomposition in this case to be

                        1 9                     9                   9
                      [( , )] + [(0, 3)] = [I1 , ] + [(I0 , (3) − 2( ))]
                        2 2                     2                   2

giving us α0 = 27 and α1 = −10.


4.2. Multiwrapped 2-branes

    As mentioned before, for multiwrapped M2 branes on a Riemann surface in a Calabi-
Yau, it is more convenient to use the D2 brane description, as that is the definition of
multi-wrapped M2 branes (by taking the coupling to infinity). The field content of N D2
branes is the same as what was noted above, except that now every field is in addition
in the adjoint representation of U (N ). In general the problem of solving for the bound
state will involve the study of the cohomology of the mixed moduli space of light gauge
degrees of freedom on the D2 brane as well as the scalar zero modes corresponding to
normal deformation of the surface Σ in the Calabi-Yau. This of course will in general be
a complicated system to study.
    To give a flavor of what new things may happen when we have multi-wrapped branes,
let us consider the case where the surface Σ has no normal deformation in the Calabi-Yau.
In this case the only other zero mode would correspond to the moduli of the gauge system,
which in this case is moduli of flat U (N ) connections on Σ. Let us call this space K g,N .
Viewing the gauge group as
                                            U (1) × SU (N )
                                 U (N ) =
                                                  ZN
Corresponding to this, the moduli space K g,N splits up to

                                             T 2g × K̂ g,N
                                   K g,N =         2g                                  (4.7)
                                                  ZN

Here T 2g is the moduli of flat U (1) connection on Σ, which is also known as its Jacobian
and K̂ g,N is the moduli of flat SU (N ) connections on Σ. This consists of the choice of 2g

                                             15
holonomies around the cycles of the “opened up” Riemann surface, up to conjugation by
an SU (N ) gauge transformation, satisfying

                              Y
                              g
                                    (gi hi gi−1 h−1
                                                 i ) = exp(2πik/N )
                              i=1


giving a space of complex dimension (g − 1)(N 2 − 1). Here k is the quantum of U (1) flux
                                                     2g
through Σ which corresponds to the D0 brane charge. ZN  in (4.7) acts by translations
by 1/N fractions along the cycles of T 2g at the same time as changing the corresponding
SU (N ) holonomy by an N -th root of unity. If k and N are relatively prime K g,N is a
smooth manifold. Physically the non-smoothness when k and N are not relatively prime
can be intepreted as corresponding to the channel available for a decay of bound states of
D0 and D2 brane at threshold. To avoid such subtleties it is natural to work in the case
where k and N are relatively prime and expect the BPS degeneracies to be valid also when
they are not prime. It is also known that all the cohomological question of this space is
independent of which k one chooses as long as it is relatively prime with N .
    Cohomology of the manifold K̂ g,N is known (for a recent discussion see [24] and refer-
ences therein). Moreover it is known that the action of ZN 2g is trivial on the cohomologies.
Thus the cohomologies of K g,N is the same as that of K̂ g,N times that of T 2g . As far as
the SU (2)L content of the states, it follows that it is given by

                                            Ig ⊗ IK̂ g,N

where IK̂ g,N denotes the representation of the corresponding bound states coming from
K̂ g,N . Even though apriori the SL(2) action is the diagonal SU (2) of SO(4), it is natural
to believe that the full gauge degree of freedom is in the SU (2)L (as is the corresponding
U (1) ⊂ U (N ) degrees of freedom) in which case one can recover the representation I from
the known cohomology formula for K̂ g,N .
    Let us now discuss some properties of K̂ g,N for various g. For genus g = 0 this is an
empty space for N > 1. In other words there are no bound states of more than one D2
brane around S 2 . For g = 1, K̂ g,N is a point for all N . In other words N D2 branes form a
single bound state for all N . The same statement applies to M2 branes, and so we conclude
that α1 = 1 and the rest of the αi for i 6= 1 are zero for all multiwrappings. Note that this
implies, from (3.2) that isolated genus 1 curves and their multiwrappings only contribute

                                                16
to F1 . Thus from a single isolated elliptic curve with area A, and including its bound state
contribution to D0 branes as well as its multiwrappings we get the F1 contribution
                                    X
                                −         log(1 − exp(−2πnA))
                                    n>0


in accordance with expectations from [25]. Note also that from (3.2) there is no contri-
bution to Fg for g > 1, in accordance with [2]. This result has also been derived recently
using the mathematical definition of topological strings [18].
    The story is more complicated for genus g > 1. The cohomologies of K̂ g,N are known,
and so the contribution of various N to various amplitudes can be obtained using (3.2).
At first sight a puzzle appears: Consider the contribution of an isolated genus g curve with
area A. As discussed before it follows from (3.2) that it contributes in particular to Fg . The
surprising aspect of this is that it will contribute to Fg also in the form k 2g−3 exp(−2πkA),
suggesting that there is a multicovering of a genus g by a genus g curve. However this is
not possible for g > 1. One may have hoped, therefore that this contribution gets cancelled
by the contribution of k M2 branes bound over that surface. However it turns out that
χ(K̂ g,N ) = 0 and so IK̂ g,N will not contain I0 and so Ig ⊗ IK̂ g,N will not contain Ig (note
Ik ⊗ Ir = Ik+r ). However, it turns out that multicovering of the M2 brane does have
deformations to a higher genus curve. In other words multi-covering of an isolated curve
is not isolated and it can deform to a higher genus surface (said differently extra scalar
zero modes exist if one considers appropriate flat bundles turned on the D2 branes). Thus
the relevant moduli space is not just the moduli of flat connection, but it will also include
deformations having to do with a higher genus curve which does contribute to Fg . Aspects
of this contribution is presently under study [26].
    We would like to thank M. Bershadsky, S. Katz, A. Klemm, N.C. Leung, J. Maldacena,
N. Nekrasov, R. Pandharipande, T. Pantev, A. Strominger, E. Witten and S.T. Yau for
valuable discussions.
    The research of R.G. is supported by DOE grant DE-FG02-91 ER40654 and that of
C.V. is supported in part by NSF grant PHY-98-02709.




                                               17
                                     References

 [1] E. Witten, “Topological Sigma Model,” Comm. Math. Phys. 118 (1988) 411 ;
     “Chern-Simons Gauge Theory As a String Theory,” hep-th/9207094.
 [2] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti,H. Ooguri, C. Vafa , “Kodaira-Spencer Theory of Gravity
     and Exact Results for Quantum String Amplitudes”, Comm. Math. Phys. 165 (1994)
     311 .
 [3] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K.S. Narain and T.R. Taylor, “Topological Amplitudes in
     String Theory”, Nucl. Phys. B413 (1994), 162.
 [4] C. Vafa, “A Stringy Test of the Fate of the Conifold,” Nucl. Phys. B447 (1995) 252.
 [5] J. Harvey and G. Moore, “Algebras, BPS States, and Strings,” Nucl.Phys. B463
     (1996) 315.
 [6] A. Klemm, P. Mayr and C. Vafa, “BPS States of Exceptional Non-critical Strings,”
     Proc. of the conf. Advanced Quantum Field Theory, (in memory of Claude Itzykson),
     hep-th/9607139.
 [7] R. Gopakumar, C. Vafa, “M-Theory and Topological Strings -I”, hep-th/9809187 .
 [8] S. Cecotti, P. Fendley, K. Intriligator and C. Vafa,“A New Supersymmetric Index,”
     Nucl. Phys. B386 (1992) 405.
 [9] S.M. Christensen and M.J. Duff, Nucl. Phys. B 154 (1979)340.
[10] C. Itzykson, J. Zuber, “Quantum field theory”, Addison Wesley Publishing.
[11] I.Antoniadis, E.Gava, K.S.Narain, T.R.Taylor, “N=2 Type II- Heterotic duality and
     Higher derivative F-terms”, Nucl. Phys. B455 (1995), 109.
[12] J.C. Breckenridge, R.C. Myers, A.W. Peet and C. Vafa, “D-branes and Spinning Black
     Holes,” Phys. Lett. B391 (1997) 93.
[13] A. Klemm, work to appear.
[14] A. Lawrence and N. Nekrasov, “Instanton sums and five-dimensional gauge theories,”
     Nucl. Phys. B513 (1998) 239.
[15] M. Marino and G. Moore, “Counting higher genus curves in a Calabi-Yau manifold,”
     hep-th/9808131.
[16] C. Faber and R. Pandharipande, “Hodge integrals and Gromov-Witten theory,”
     math.AG/9810173.
[17] M. Bershadsky, V. Sadov and C. Vafa,“D-Branes and Topological Field Theories,”
     Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996) 420.
[18] R. Pandharipande, “Hodge Integrals and Degenerate Contributions,” math.AG/9811140.
[19] J.A. Minahan, D. Nemeschansky, C. Vafa and N.P. Warner,“E-Strings and N=4 Topo-
     logical Yang-Mills Theories,” hep-th/9802168.
[20] C. Vafa, “Black Holes and Calabi-Yau Threefolds,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998)
     207.
[21] N. Nekrasov,“In the Woods of M-theory,” hep-th/9810168.

                                          18
[22] S.T. Yau and E. Zaslow,“BPS States, String Duality and Nodal Curves on K3,” Nucl.
     Phys. B471 (1996) 503.
[23] P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of Algebraic Geometry, Wiley-Interscience, New
     York 1978.
[24] G. Laumon and M. Rapoport,“The Langlands Lemma and the Betti Numbers of
     Stacks of G-bundles on a Curve,” alg-geom/9503006.
[25] M.Bershadsky, S.Cecotti, H.Ooguri, C.Vafa , “Holomorphic Anomalies in Topological
     Field Theories, Nucl. Phys. B405 (1993), 279 .
[26] T. Pantev and C. Vafa, work in progress.




                                            19
