                                                                                                              arXiv:0705.4098




                                                   Extended Holomorphic Anomaly
                                                                 and
                                              Loop Amplitudes in Open Topological String




arXiv:0705.4098v4 [hep-th] 4 Feb 2009
                                                                          Johannes Walcher
                                                       School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study
                                                                     Princeton, New Jersey, USA

                                                                              Abstract
                                          Open topological string amplitudes on compact Calabi-Yau threefolds are shown
                                        to satisfy an extension of the holomorphic anomaly equation of Bershadsky, Cecotti,
                                        Ooguri and Vafa. The total topological charge of the D-brane configuration must van-
                                        ish in order to satisfy tadpole cancellation. The boundary state of such D-branes is
                                        holomorphically captured by a Hodge theoretic normal function. Its Griffiths’ infinites-
                                        imal invariant is the analogue of the closed string Yukawa coupling and plays the role
                                        of the terminator in a Feynman diagram expansion for the topological string with D-
                                        branes. The holomorphic anomaly equation is solved and the holomorphic ambiguity
                                        is fixed for some representative worldsheets of low genus and with few boundaries on
                                        the real quintic.




                                        May 2007
Contents

1 Introduction and Summary                                                               3
  1.1 General theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
  1.2 Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
  1.3 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     10

2 Extended Holomorphic Anomaly                                                          10
  2.1 Twisted N = 2 theories      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
  2.2 Geometry of the vacuum bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         13
  2.3 First comments on boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
  2.4 Closed string holomorphic anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20
  2.5 More on the vacuum bundle. D-branes as normal functions . . . . . . .             23
  2.6 Infinitesimal invariant and holomorphic anomaly on the disk . . . . . .           28
  2.7 Holomorphic anomaly with D-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           33
  2.8 Holomorphic anomaly at one loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         36
  2.9 Holomorphic anomaly with insertions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40
  2.10 Solution of extended holomorphic anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41

3 Open Topological String Amplitudes on the Real Quintic                                43
  3.1 Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44
  3.2 Large volume expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        47
  3.3 Orbifold expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      49
  3.4 Conifold expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      51
Acknowledgments                                                                         53
References                                                                              53




                                          2
1    Introduction and Summary

The topological phase of string theory is one of the cornerstones of modern mathemat-
ical physics. The theory is highly solvable, perhaps even completely integrable, while
at the same time capturing a wealth of highly non-trivial mathematical and physical
information about the vacuum geometry of superstring theory. The topological string
shares many important dynamical features with the ordinary string, including D-branes
and gauge/gravity duality. Moreover, topological strings on Calabi-Yau threefolds in
fact directly compute certain higher-derivative F-terms in the effective action of the
critical superstring compactified on the same manifold. This allows the topological
string to be an important ingredient in the understanding of string duality, as well as
in black hole entropy computations.
    One of the reasons that the topological string is so efficiently solvable is the existence
of various differential equations satisfied by topological correlation functions. These
differential equations originate for instance from topological Ward identities expressing
independence of the worldsheet theory from the worldsheet metric. The special struc-
tures of the topological theory allow to integrate these equations up to some integration
constants which are specified by classical data of the underlying model.
    There are many reasons for which the most interesting construction is to topolog-
ically twist a family of unitary N = 2 superconformal field theories of central charge
ĉ = 3. Such theories have the richest set of non-trivial topological amplitudes, and
are most directly linked to physics in four dimensions. In this critical instance, the
relevant differential equation is the holomorphic anomaly equation of Bershadsky, Ce-
cotti, Ooguri and Vafa [1, 2], which controls the amplitudes as functions over coupling
space. As will be reviewed more extensively below, the holomorphic anomaly is deeply
rooted in the unitarity or CPT invariance of the underlying N = 2 CFT, which leads
to an identification of BRST and anti-ghost cohomology. The latter is therefore non-
trivial, in distinction to say the physical bosonic string. These states, although BRST
trivial, do not decouple from the topological amplitudes, but they fail to do so in a
very controlled fashion, precisely captured by the holomorphic anomaly equation. The
integration of this equation leads to polynomial expressions for all topological ampli-
tudes in terms of tree-level data plus (at each order of perturbation theory) a finite
number of integration constants, the so-called holomorphic ambiguity. The tree-level
data for the critical topological string is a special Kähler manifold such as for instance


                                              3
the moduli space of a Calabi-Yau manifold, first computed in the work of Candelas et
al. [3]. Fixing the holomorphic ambiguity usually requires physical insights into the
space-time physics associated with the corresponding compactification of the type II
string.
       Hitherto, most discussions of the holomorphic anomaly have focused on the closed
string. On the one hand, it can be argued that the closed topological string is more
intrinsic to the Calabi-Yau geometry as it does not depend on the choice of a D-
brane configuration on top of the manifold. On the other hand, this point of view
completely ignores the central role played by D-branes in mirror symmetry and of
course in topological gauge/gravity duality, and hence for closed strings themselves.
Any exploration of these topics does require knowledge of topological amplitudes in the
presence of D-branes, i.e., on worldsheets with boundaries. So far, these amplitudes
have been obtained only indirectly, such as from matrix models or via Chern-Simons
theory, or in rather brute force toric computations in the A-model. It is clearly desirable
to develop a more systematic approach to open topological string amplitudes, at the
loop as well as at tree level.
       The computation of Candelas et al. [3] was recently extended to the open string
in ref. [4]. In that paper, a differential equation was proposed whose solution gives
the tension of the domainwall between two vacua on a certain brane wrapped on the
quintic, as a function of the single closed string modulus. From the topological string
perspective, one is computing the disk amplitude. When expanded in A-model vari-
ables, this solution contains the number (Gromov-Witten invariant) of holomorphic
disks ending in a non-trivial one-cycle on the brane. These predictions were partially
checked in [4], and fully verified in [5]. The B-model origin of the differential equation
of [4] is being explained in [6], in line with what had been anticipated in previous work
[7].
       The consistency of the emerging general picture of the open topological string at
tree level has given hope that the computation could be extended to higher worldsheet
topologies, analogously to what was done in [1, 2] for the closed string, by using the
holomorphic anomaly. We will show in this paper that this is indeed possible. The
holomorphic anomaly for open string has been previously studied in [2, 8, 9, 10], and
was interpreted also in [11, 12]. In particular, in [10], open topological string amplitudes
on certain local Calabi-Yau geometries are computed to all orders using matrix models,
and found to satisfy a holomorphic anomaly equation. The paper [9] discusses open


                                             4
topological string amplitudes in local toric geometries more generally, and finds an
explicit expression for the holomorphic anomaly of the annulus amplitude. It will be
very interesting to elucidate the relation to our present work, which is focused on
compact Calabi-Yau manifolds.
      We have divided the bulk of the paper into two parts. In the first part (section 2),
we will review from [2] the vacuum geometry of twisted N = 2 models as well as the
derivation of the holomorphic anomaly for closed string amplitudes. In parallel, we
will describe the extension to open strings. In the second part of the paper (section
3), we will apply the general formalism to compute topological amplitudes on various
worldsheets with boundary on the real quintic, which is the D-brane geometry that
was solved in [4]. But now, let us summarize the main ideas and results of this paper.

1.1     General theory

The quantities of interest in this paper are the perturbative topological string ampli-
tudes F (g,h) for open plus closed strings. The F (g,h) are defined by integrating over the
moduli space, M(g,h) , of (oriented) Riemann surfaces of genus g and with h boundary
components, the appropriate correlation function of the topologically twisted 2d world-
sheet theory. The F (g,h) are functions (or rather, sections of an appropriate bundle)
over coupling space, M, which is a complex manifold. As in [2] (henceforth referred to
simply as BCOV), the holomorphic anomaly is a statement about the anti-holomorphic
           ¯ (g,h) . While naively zero, it turns out that ∂F
derivative ∂F                                              ¯ (g,h) receives a contribution
from, and only from, the boundary ∂M(g,h) of M(g,h) , where the term “boundary” here
refers in the complex sense to the parts of M(g,h) that have been added to the space
of actual Riemann surfaces to make a compact M(g,h). In other words, the boundary
term arises from the singularities or contact terms that appear in the integrand of
F (g,h) when the Riemann surface degenerates. The key to the holomorphic anomaly is
that the boundary term itself is not a holomorphic function over M.
      For the closed string, (g, h) = (g, 0), the Riemann surface can degenerate in one of
two ways. It can either split into two Riemann surfaces of lower genus g1 and g2 , or a
handle can pinch, leaving a Riemann surface of genus g − 1. The holomorphic anomaly
equation for F (g) ≡ F (g,0) then takes the form (for g > 1; for g ≤ 1, see below)
                            1                         X
                                                               (g ) (g )   (g−1)
                                                                                 
                 ∂ī F (g) = Cīj̄ k̄ e 2K Gj̄j Gk̄k          Fj 1 Fk 2 + Fjk            (1.1)
                            2                         g +g =g
                                                  1   2


Here, F (g) with subscripts, i, j, etc., refer to amplitudes with insertions, i.e., derivatives

                                              5
                                                           (0)
of F (g) in holomorphic directions on M, and Cijk ≡ Fijk is the three-point function
on the sphere (Yukawa coupling), which is holomorphic (whence Cīj̄ k̄ ≡ Cijk is anti-
holomorphic). (See the next section for the precise explanation of all the symbols.)
What is important to recognize here is that the sum involves only g1 , g2 < g, so that
eq. (1.1) really is a recursive relation for the topological amplitudes genus by genus. The
underlying reason is that the amplitude on the sphere with less than three insertions
vanishes.
   For the open string, h 6= 0, we first of all have to choose boundary conditions, in
other words we have to specify a D-brane configuration. Then, we can write an exten-
sion of (1.1) to the open string at the conjuncture of the following four fundamental
facts.

(F1) For generic values of the bulk moduli, the topological amplitudes do not depend
 on any continuous open string moduli. To justify this, we note that the topological
 disk amplitude, F (0,1) , is interpreted physically as the 4d superpotential on the brane
 worldvolume. Brane moduli correspond to flat directions of this superpotential, so
 F (0,1) cannot depend on them. Since the holomorphic anomaly ultimately reduces
 everything to tree-level information, we do not expect any F (g,h) to depend on open
 string moduli. Note, however, that we are not claiming that open string moduli are
 generically absent, or otherwise uninteresting, just that we can ignore them for our
 present purposes.
(F2) The topological charge of the D-brane configuration under consideration van-
 ishes. This can be traced back to the statement that the physical quantity we are
 computing at tree-level is the tension of BPS domainwalls between various brane
 vacua, in other words superpotential differences, and not directly the value of the
 superpotential itself. Note that the topological charges are carried by the ground
 states corresponding to marginal directions of the “other” topological string (for
 B-branes—the A-model, for A-branes—the B-model), which are BRST trivial and
 should decouple. We therefore view this restriction as a kind of topological tadpole
 cancellation condition.
(F3) The disk amplitude with two bulk insertions is the analogue of the closed string
 Yukawa coupling. This is in fact easy to see. The Yukawa coupling is so central
 data because it is the first non-vanishing amplitude at tree-level (the sphere 0, 1,
 and 2-point functions vanish), and all higher-point functions on the sphere can be


                                            6
 computed from it by simply taking derivatives. (Although, taking derivatives requires
 information not contained in the Yukawa coupling itself.) For open strings, the
 naively simplest quantities to consider are the disk amplitude with three boundary
 insertions or with one bulk and one boundary insertion. Both precisely cancel the
 ghost-number anomaly on the disk. However, given (F1) above, we generically do
 not have any non-trivial operators to insert on the boundary, and then the first non-
 vanishing quantity is indeed the disk two-point function. Since one of the insertions
 then has to be (half-)integrated, we find that the disk two-point function is itself
 not holomorphic, in clear distinction to the closed string, where the Yukawa coupling
 always remains holomorphic. The holomorphic anomaly equation for the disk two-
 point function can be viewed as the open string analogue of special geometry.
(F4) For 2g + h − 2 > 0, the holomorphic anomaly receives no contribution from
 factorization in the open string channel. This can be understood as a consequence
 of the rule that only moduli fields could contribute in such factorizations (cf., (1.1)),
 and those are excluded by (F1) above. As a consequence, the only degenerations
 which contribute new terms on the RHS of (1.1) are those where the length of a
 boundary component shrinks to zero size. The only exception to this rule occurs for
 (g, h) = (0, 2), i.e., the annulus amplitude. This exception is a direct counterpart of
 the anomaly of the torus amplitude (g, h) = (1, 0).

       (F4) above determines the general structure of the extended holomorphic anomaly
equation, whereas (F3) gives the basic connection to geometric data at tree-level. To
immediately1 give away the punchline of this identification, let us first recall the com-
putation of the Yukawa coupling in the B-model. If Ω(z) ∈ H 3,0 (Y ) denotes the
holomorphic three-form as a function of the complex structure moduli of the Calabi-
Yau manifold Y , then the Yukawa coupling (which is mirror to the instanton corrected
triple intersection in the A-model) can be computed as

                             Cijk = −hΩ, ∇i ∇j ∇k Ωi = −hΩ, ∂i ∂j ∂k Ωi                         (1.2)
                                                                 R
where ∇ is the Gauss-Manin connection, and h·, ·i =               Y
                                                                      · ∧ · the symplectic pairing on
H 3 (Y ). The equality with ordinary derivatives is a consequence of Griffiths transver-
sality,
                                     hΩ, ∇∇Ωi = hΩ, ∇Ωi = 0 .                                   (1.3)
   1
       and very imprecisely; the patient reader is urged to skip the next paragraph or two.


                                                    7
      Now consider open strings. It will follow from (F1), (F2) above, and is further
explained in [6] that the invariant holomorphic data that characterizes a topological
D-brane at tree-level is a Poincaré normal function, in the sense introduced by Griffiths
in his early work [13] on higher-dimensional Hodge theory. Very briefly, a normal
function, ν, is defined by a three-chain Γ ⊂ Y whose boundary is a holomorphic curve.
Such a three-chain does not quite specify an element in H 3 (Y ). But because the
boundary is holomorphic, integration against Γ in any case gives a well-defined pairing
with cohomology classes in H 3,0 (Y ) and H 2,1 (Y ). Physically, we identify
                                                   Z
                                   T = hΩ, νi = Ω                                        (1.4)
                                                        Γ

with the domainwall tension. The hallmark of a normal function is its own version of
Griffiths transversality [13]
                                           hΩ, ∇νi = 0                                   (1.5)

obviously the analogue of (1.3). All the local information about ν is then contained
in the Griffiths’ infinitesimal invariant [14, 15, 16], which we identify with the disk
two-point function,
                                  (0,1)
                                Fij       = ∆ij = hΩ, ∇i ∇j νi .                         (1.6)

Let us pause. Mathematically, the infinitesimal invariant is not known as a symmetric
tensor defined by (1.6), but only as a certain Koszul cohomology class whose representa-
tive depends on a lift of ν to H 3 (Y ; C). But, given (1.4) and its physical interpretation,
there is a preferred lift given by declaring ν to be real, i.e., ν ∈ H 3 (Y ; R) ⊂ H 3 (Y ; C).
Conspicuously, reality is not compatible with holomorphic dependence on the param-
eters. But this is precisely the holomorphic anomaly of the disk two-point function
expected from (F3) above! And with this point driven home, we can put off all further
explanations to the next section.

1.2     Examples

The example on which we will test the extended holomorphic anomaly equation is in
the A-model given by the quintic hypersurface X ⊂ P4 , where we wrap a D-brane
on the real locus L ⊂ X inside of it. The B-model mirror of X is well-known as the
mirror quintic, and the D-brane is best described by a certain matrix factorization
of the corresponding Landau-Ginzburg potential. The holomorphic tree-level data for
this brane configuration was determined in [4], further explanations appear in [6].

                                                 8
   The main point of [4] was that the domainwall tension (1.4) for the real quintic
satisfies an extended or inhomogeneous version of the Picard-Fuchs differential equation
governing periods of the mirror quintic,
                                               √
                                     LT (z) = c z,                                  (1.7)

where L is the Picard-Fuchs operator. The value of the constant c was determined
in [4] from monodromy considerations, and checked against explicit computations in
the A- and B-model in [5] and [6], respectively. This constant will prove of crucial
importance for the present purposes, as it allows us to identify the correct real lift of
the corresponding normal function.
   We can then plug this tree-level data into the holomorphic anomaly equations. We
will here solve these equations for small (g, h) in a rather pedestrian fashion, compared
with the best currently available technology. In particular, we will not attempt to
formulate a polynomial solution as done by Yamaguchi and Yau in [17] for the closed
string. But we note that the structure of the equations strongly suggests that this is
straightforwardly possible.
   We then also need to fix the holomorphic ambiguity, which is one of the central
problems in using the holomorphic anomaly equations to solve the topological string.
In the closed string case, constraints on the holomorphic ambiguity arise from the
physical expectations on the expansion of the F (g) around the special or singular loci
in the moduli space. This was convincingly pushed to very high order in recent work by
Huang, Klemm and Quackenbush [18]. For the quintic, the three special points are large
volume, conifold, and Gepner (or orbifold) point. The expansion of topological string
amplitudes around large volume has been shown to capture the BPS content of an M-
theory compactification, and as a consequence to satisfy a certain integrality property
known after Gopakumar and Vafa [19]. Around the conifold, the F (g) are generally
singular, but with a singularity structure determined by the appearance of precisely
one massless BPS particle in the corresponding string compactification. Finally, the
regularity of F (g) around the Gepner point also imposes additional constraints.
   For the open string, we also have an integrality conjecture at large volume proposed
by Ooguri and Vafa [20], and refined by Labastida, Mariño, and Vafa [21]. According
to this conjecture, the open topological string amplitudes count degeneracies of BPS
states (domainwalls) in the 2-dimensional worldvolume theory of a brane partially
wrapped on the Calabi-Yau. We also expect some sort of singularity structure at the

                                           9
conifold. The main novelty for us is that the Gepner point is not a regular point once
open strings are included. As pointed out in [22, 23], the D-brane under consideration
exhibits an extra massless open string in its cohomology precisely at the Gepner point.
As a consequence [4], a tensionless domainwall appears in the BPS spectrum, and this is
expected to leave an imprint on the topological string amplitudes F (g,h) for h > 0. (The
attentive reader will see this a qualification of the statement (F1) above.) We cannot
at present describe the singularity structure in general. Nevertheless, with certain
(likely too optimistic) assumptions, we will be able to fix the holomorphic ambiguity
for the topological amplitudes F (0,2) , F (0,3) and F (1,1) . In particular, we will find an
integral structure around large volume, as would be predicted from the existence of
BPS invariants.

1.3   Conclusions

From what we have said in this introduction, it is clear that this work is a direct
generalization of BCOV to the open string sector, and has bypassed many of the
intervening developments on the structure of the holomorphic anomaly, techniques for
solving it, as well as relations to target space physics. It will be very interesting to
revisit these various connections.


2     Extended Holomorphic Anomaly

We will begin by refreshing the main ideas, results, and derivations from BCOV [2]. The
main purpose of subsections 2.1, 2.2, 2.4 is to establish notation and collect some useful
formulas. The interlaced subsection 2.3 contains a few basic points about D-branes in
the topological string, emphasizing the deformation and obstruction theory that is
needed to understand fact (F1) from the introduction. In subsection 2.5, we describe
how D-branes fit into the geometry of the vacuum bundle. After these preparations,
we are then ready to derive the holomorphic anomaly equation for the open string,
for the disk in subsection 2.6, and for higher topologies in 2.7. In subsection 2.8, we
discuss the special status of the holomorphic anomaly at one loop in both closed and
open string. In subsection 2.9, we write down the holomorphic anomaly for amplitudes
with chiral insertions. Finally, in subsection 2.10, we will develop the basic techniques
for solving the extended holomorphic anomaly equation, in parallel to the method of
BCOV.


                                             10
2.1     Twisted N = 2 theories

The starting point for the definition of a topological string theory is a 2-dimensional
conformal field theory with N = (2, 2) worldsheet supersymmetry. Such theories have
a total of four real supercharges, two of holomorphic origin (on the worldsheet), G± ,
                                      ±
and two anti-holomorphic ones, G . Here, the superscript indicates the charge under
the U(1) R-symmetries, J, J . We will for simplicity directly assume that the central
charge of the theory is ĉ = 3, and that all U(1) charges are integer. The holomorphic
supercharges satisfy the algebra

                    (G± )2 = 0 ,     {G+ , G− } = 2L0 ,      [G± , L0 ] = 0             (2.1)

where L0 denotes the zero mode of the holomorphic stress-tensor. The anti-holomorphic
version of the algebra is similar.
      Among the important operators in an N = (2, 2) SCFT are the chiral primary
operators, which are defined from the cohomology of the supercharges. The chiral
operators form a ring and are in one-to-one correspondence with the supersymmetric
ground states of the theory [24]. There are in fact four different rings that can be
constructed, depending on the combination of holomorphic/anti-holomorphic super-
charges (see table 1). The U(1) R-symmetries provide the rings with two gradings,
which we will denote by q and q̄. Fields which are chiral primary on the holomorphic
side have 0 ≤ q ≤ ĉ, while the anti-chiral ones have 0 ≥ q ≥ ĉ, and similarly for the
anti-holomorphic side. The U(1) charge of the corresponding RR ground states, which
can be reached from each of the chiral rings by spectral flow, lie between −ĉ/2 and
ĉ/2.
      Two discrete symmetries of an N = 2 SCFT are of particular importance for the
topological theory. The first one is simply CPT invariance on the worldsheet, which
identifies the (c, c) ring with the (a, a) ring, and the (c, a) ring with the (a, c) ring.
The other symmetry is just as obvious from the algebra (2.1), but more subtle in its
consequences. It is the mirror automorphism which exchanges the (c, c) with the (c, a)
ring and the (a, a) with the (a, c) ring. For most of the discussion in topological strings,
only two of the rings are relevant at the same time. To be specific, we will concentrate
on the topological B-model, and its conjugate counterpart, the anti-topological B-
model. We will sometimes refer to the A-model as “the other model”.
      Part of the interest of the chiral rings arises from the fact that the subset of fields
of charge (q, q̄) = (1, 1) parametrize deformations of the SCFT. Given an infinitesimal

                                              11
          model                       chiral ring         BRST charges        anti-ghosts
                                                                      −                 +
          topological A-model             (c, a)                 G+ , G        G− , G
                                                                      +                 −
          anti-topological A-model        (a, c)                 G− , G        G+ , G
                                                                      +                 −
          topological B-model             (c, c)                 G+ , G        G− , G
                                                                      −                 +
          anti-topological B-model        (a, a)                 G− , G        G+ , G


Table 1: Four different topological models can be constructed from any N = (2, 2) super-
conformal field theory.

chiral primary φ with those charges, we can deform the theory by adding to the action,
                        Z             Z            Z        Z
                             2  2         2  2          (2)
                   δS = d zd θφ + d zd θ̄φ̄ = φ + φ̄(2)                          (2.2)
                                                                                     −
where φ̄ is the anti-chiral field conjugate to φ. Also, φ(2) = dzdz̄{G− , [G , φ]} will be
the two-form descendant of φ.
   The next step in the construction is the topological twist of the SCFT into a
topological field theory. The twist amounts to redefining the worldsheet stress tensor
T → T ± ∂J, or equivalently to couple the U(1) R-symmetry current to a background
connection which is equal to the spin connection on the worldsheet. Just as there are
four chiral rings, there are also four different topological twists. After the topological
twist, half of the supercharges become scalar, the other half one-forms, and the algebra
(2.1) coincides with the algebra satisfied by the BRST operator and anti-ghost in the
critical bosonic string. The U(1) charges are identified with the ghost numbers. More
specifically, for the topological B-model, one identifies

                          2QBRST ↔ G+ ,       b0 ↔ G− ,              bc ↔ J                 (2.3)

While formally similar, there are three important differences to the bosonic string.
Firstly, there is no ghost field, or more precisely, ghost and matter fields are not
decoupled from one another. Secondly, we have a finite-dimensional BRST cohomology.
The Hilbert space of closed string physical states decomposes according to the grading
of the chiral ring by the two U(1) charges,
                                                3
                                                M
                                    Hclosed =            Hq,q̄                              (2.4)
                                                q,q̄=0

Finally, the cohomology of the anti-ghost is non-trivial. This is obvious from the
definition since by the identification (2.3), the anti-ghost cohomology is simply the

                                             12
anti-chiral ring, which is isomorphic to the chiral ring by worldsheet CPT. This has
profound consequences, among others the holomorphic anomaly. But at first, these
modifications appear minor, and the structure obtained by the topological twist of a
unitary N = 2 SCFT is sufficient to define a measure on the moduli space of Riemann
surfaces just as in the bosonic string. This is the topological string.

2.2     Geometry of the vacuum bundle

The most interesting aspects of the structure of N = (2, 2) SCFTs and their topological
twists are revealed when one considers them in families. It was already mentioned above
that one can parametrize the infinitesimal deformations of the topological B-model by
the chiral fields of charge (q, q̄) = (1, 1). These deformations are in fact all unobstructed
and span a complex manifold, M, of dimension n = dim H1,1 . We will now continue
to follow BCOV and concentrate on the subring of the chiral ring generated by the
marginal fields. If (φi ) for i = 1, . . . , n is a basis of marginal fields, a basis for the
subring they generate is given by (φ0 , φi , φi , φ0 ). Here, φ0 is the identity operator of
charge (q, q̄) = (0, 0), and φi are the charge (2, 2) fields which are dual to φi with
respect to the topological metric

                                  η(φi , φj ) = hφi φj i0 = δij                        (2.5)

where h · ig=0 denotes the correlation function of the topological field theory on the
sphere. Finally, φ0 is the top element in the chiral ring, of charge (3, 3), and satisfies

                                  η(φ0 , φ0) = hφ0φ0 i0 = 1                            (2.6)

The ring structure is encoded in the three-point function on the sphere, also known as
the Yukawa coupling,
                                      Cijk = hφi φj φk i0                              (2.7)

Namely,

              φi φ0 = φi ,    φi φj = Cijk φk ,       φi φj = δij φ0 ,   φi φ0 = 0     (2.8)

Note that by topological invariance, it does not matter where on the sphere we insert
the operators in either the definition of the metric or the Yukawa coupling.
      As we move around in the moduli space M, the space of vacua with q = q̄ generated
by the moduli fields fit together into a holomorphic vector bundle known as the vacuum

                                               13
bundle V → M. At any point m ∈ M, we can decompose
                                  Vm = H0,0 ⊕ H1,1 ⊕ H2,2 ⊕ H3,3                                  (2.9)
As we have done before, we will use the operator-state correspondence to identify the
basis of the chiral ring with a basis for Vm . Namely, we let e0 ∈ H0,0 be the unique-
up-to-scale ground state of charge (0, 0), and then obtain a basis of Vm by
                             ei = φi e0 ,       ei = φi e0 ,         e0 = φ0 e0 .               (2.10)
The topological metric (2.5), (2.6) is then a metric on the vacuum bundle,2
                          η(ea , eb ) = hea |eb i = δab ,        for a, b = 0, . . . n          (2.11)
       Another essential ingredient for the holomorphic anomaly is the existence of another
metric on V besides the topological one, (2.5), (2.6). This metric is known as the tt∗ -
metric and its definition depends in an essential way on the unitarity of the underlying
N = 2 SCFT. If Θ is the CPT operator acting on the ground states, we define the
tt∗ -metric by [25]
                                        gab̄ = g(eb , ea ) = hΘb|ai                             (2.12)
(If one wants to define this inner product by a path integral as in (2.5), one has to
be more careful about where one inserts the operators.) Using the tt∗ -metric, one can
define a new basis for the charge 2 and 3 subbundles of V, via
                                       eī = ek gkī        e0̄ = e0 g00̄                       (2.13)
       The set of data discussed above satisfies a number of relations, known as the tt∗ -
equations [25], and which specialize to special geometry for ĉ = 3. Let us write out
these equations for future reference.
       First of all, the tt∗ -metric induces a connection on the bundle V. This connection
is simply the unique one compatible with the metric and the holomorphic structure
on V. With respect to the basis (ea ) = (e0 , ei , eī , e0̄ ), the connection matrix of the tt∗ -
connection, Di (ea ) = (Ai )ba eb , is given by the usual formula, Ai = g −1∂i g, or explicitly
                                                                                     
          g 0̄0 ∂i g00̄                                 0
                          j̄l
                                                                                     
                       g     ∂i g mj̄
                                                       0                              
  Ai =                                   ,     Aī =                                  (2.14)
                                                                l̄k
        
                                      0  
                                          
                                                       
                                                             g     ∂  g
                                                                     ī k m̄
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                              0̄0
                                         0                                   g ∂ī g00̄
   2
       ’h’ and ’i’ are somewhat over-used in this context. Our conventions are that h·i(g,h) denotes
worldsheet correlators, h·|·i the symmetric topological metric, and h·, ·i the symplectic pairing, which
is anti-symmetric. We will try to be consistent.

                                                       14
Furthermore, the vacuum bundle carries an action of the chiral fields, as we have already
used in the definition of the basis (2.10). In matrix representation, multiplication by
the chiral fields φi , φī is explicitly,
                                                                                
                        0      0      0      0                    0 Gj̄m 0    0
                                                                 0 0 Cj̄ m̄l 0 
                       l                                                        
                      δi      0      0      0
               Ci =   0 C l̄ 0
                                               ,          Cj̄ = 
                                                                 0 0
                                                                                   
                                                                                l̄ 
                                                                                         (2.15)
                              im            0                        0    δj̄ 
                        0      0    Gim̄     0                    0 0    0    0

where Ciml̄ := Ciml g l̄l . The tt∗ -connection and the multiplication by the chiral ring
satisfy the so-called tt∗ -equations,

                         [Di , Dj ] = [Dī , Dj̄ ] = [Di , Cj̄ ] = [Dī , Cj ] = 0
                           [Di , Cj ] = [Dj , Ci ]         [Dī , Cj̄ ] = [Dj̄ , Cī ]   (2.16)
                                        [Di , Dj̄ ] = −[Ci , Cj̄ ]

These equations are equivalent to the flatness of the one-parameter family of “im-
proved” connections on V, often referred to as the Gauss-Manin connection,

                             ∇i = Di − αCi                ∇ī = Dī − α−1 Cī            (2.17)

The value of the parameter α in identifying ∇ with the geometric Gauss-Manin con-
nection has to do with the existence of a real structure on the vacuum bundle, which
is a point to which we shall return below in subsection 2.5.
    For ĉ = 3, the tt∗ -equations can be formulated more intrinsically in terms of the
geometry of the moduli space M itself (as opposed to the vacuum bundle over it).
As we have noted, there is an identification between the charge (1, 1) subbundle of V
and the tangent bundle of M. The identification involves the charge (0, 0) space H0,0 ,
which forms a holomorphic line bundle L over M. Namely,

                                            H1,1 ∼
                                                 = L ⊗ TM                                (2.18)

The charge (2, 2) and (3, 3) subbundles can be identified with the duals of L ⊗ T M and
L, respectively, by using the topological metric, or with their hermitian conjugates by
using the tt∗ -metric.
    A metric on M, known as the Zamolodchikov metric, can be defined by restricting
the tt∗ -metric to H(1,1) and using the identification (2.18)
                                                gij̄
                                        Gij̄ =                                           (2.19)
                                                g00̄

                                                     15
It follows from the tt∗ -equations that the Zamolodchikov metric is a Kähler metric on
M, with Kähler potential K = − log g00̄ . Namely,

                                                Gij̄ = ∂i ∂j̄ K                                  (2.20)

Moreover, the Yukawa coupling is a symmetric rank 3 tensor with values in L−2 which
is holomorphic, and whose covariant derivative is symmetric in all four indices,

                                ∂l̄ Cij,k = 0 ,           Di Cjkl = Dj Cikl .                    (2.21)

Here, by abuse of notation, we are using D to denote the natural connection on
Sym3 T ∗ M ⊗ L−2 , given by the sum of the Zamolodchikov connection (the metric con-
nection for Gij̄ ) and the Kähler connection on L. (This is consistent with D being the
tt∗ -connection on L ⊗ T M.) Finally, the curvature of the Zamolodchikov metric is (in
its representation on the tangent bundle, with basis φi )

                (Rij̄ )kl = [Di , Dj̄ ]kl = Cilm Cj̄ m̄k̄ e 2K Gm̄m Gk̄k − δlk Gij̄ − δik Glj̄   (2.22)

Many formulas compactify if we agree to raise and lower indices with the tt∗ -metric,
e.g.,
                               Cījk := Cīj̄ k̄ g j̄j g k̄k = Cīj̄ k̄ e 2K Gj̄j Gk̄k           (2.23)
The conditions (2.20), (2.21), (2.22) are precisely equivalent to what is known as a
special Kähler structure on the moduli space M.

2.3     First comments on boundaries

Boundary conditions in N = 2 theories have been studied in many works over the years
since BCOV. We will here recall some standard and some possibly less-well appreciated
facts (for background material see [26]), and then quickly move to the generalization
of the structures described in the previous subsection, which is our main interest in
this paper.
      Recall that starting from an N = (2, 2) CFT, we can construct two different topo-
logical theories, the A-model and the B-model, depending on which combination of left
and right-moving supercharges becomes the BRST operator. Since defining D-branes
involves choosing boundary conditions between left and right-movers, this means we
can also consider two kinds of D-branes, called A-branes and B-branes, respectively
[27]. For example, the boundary conditions for B-branes are,
                 −                     +
          G− + G |∂Σ = 0 ,       G+ + G |∂Σ = 0 ,
                                                              
                                                         J − J ∂Σ = 0                            (2.24)

                                                        16
B-type boundary conditions are compatible with B-type topological twist in the sense
that we can define topological string amplitudes with background D-branes that are
BRST invariant.
       Somewhat oddly at first, it also makes sense to consider A-type boundary conditions
when one is in the B-model, and B-type boundary conditions in the A-model. To see
the relevance of the branes from the other model, consider the overlaps of some B-
brane B, boundary state |Bi, with the supersymmetric (Ramond-Ramond) ground
states, which compute the topological charges of D-branes modulo torsion,

                                              hrgs|Bi                                          (2.25)

Using (2.24), it is not hard to show that this vanishes unless qrgs + q̄rgs = 0, namely
the vector R-charge of the ground state has to vanish. These ground states do not
correspond to the marginal (c, c)-fields if one uses spectral flow to the B-model, but
rather to the marginal (q, q̄) = (1, −1) fields from the (c, a) ring in the topological
A-model. Somewhat informally, one can think that the topological charges of B-branes
are carried by the A-model (and vice-versa).3 Conversely, it means that if we want
to use D-branes to probe the structure of the vacuum bundle (see subsection 2.5), we
have to take them from the other model.
       For now, let us discuss aspects of B-branes in the B-model. For boundary conditions
preserving N = 2 supersymmetry, the essentials of the discussion on chiral rings, their
relation to (open string) supersymmetric ground states, etc., remain unchanged. The
main difference is that we have only one R-charge to label the states and fields,

                                         Hopen = ⊕3p=0 Hp                                      (2.26)

The relation between bulk and boundary R-charges is

                                             p = q + q̄                                        (2.27)

We will generically denote elements of the boundary chiral ring by ψa , or ψi for the
marginal fields with p = 1. We will write ui for the corresponding worldsheet couplings.
In distinction to the closed string case, these deformation are not always unobstructed.
   3
    This interaction of A- and B-model has also become familiar in recent years in the context of
stability conditions [28, 29, 30]. For Lagrangian (A-)branes, they involve the holomorphic three-form,
which is a B-model quantity, whereas for B-branes, stability depends on the (complexified, quantum
corrected) Kähler form.

                                                 17
Rather, there can be a higher order superpotential W = W(u), whose critical points
as a function of the ui determine the supersymmetric vacua of the D-brane theory.
   In the categorical approach to D-branes on Calabi-Yau manifolds, the obstructions
and the superpotential are succinctly encoded in a so-called A∞ -structure on the trian-
gulated D-brane category. (The study of A∞ -structures to which the present discussion
is closest in spirit appears in [31]. See [32] for an extension to higher worldsheet topolo-
gies. The homological background for D-brane physics is explained in many works, see
for instance [33, 34, 35, 36].) More precisely, if B, B ′ are two B-branes, the topological
Hilbert spaces of B–B ′ -strings are identified as Ext-groups between the objects in the
category
                                    p
                                   HB−B   ∼    p     ′
                                        ′ = Ext (B, B )                              (2.28)

Infinitesimal deformations of a brane B correspond to Ext1 (B, B), obstruction spaces
to Ext2 (B, B). Furthermore, there is a collection of higher-order obstruction maps,
                                      ⊗n
                   mn : Ext1 (B, B)         → Ext2 (B, B) ,        (n ≥ 2)           (2.29)

which by using the topological open string metric can be identified with the n+ 1-point
function on the disk, see Fig. 1. The worldvolume superpotential can then be defined
as [37]
                                       ∞
                                       X    1
                            WB (u) =           hu|mn (u⊗n )i .                       (2.30)
                                       n=2
                                           n+1
Its critical points correspond precisely to the locus where the higher-order obstruction
maps vanish.
   Not only are open string deformations often obstructed by the non-vanishing of
higher products on the Ext-groups, but the very presence of background D-branes can
sometimes obstruct the closed string deformations. Since this will be important later
on, let us give a brief worldsheet derivation of this fact.
   A basic feature of F-terms in supersymmetric theories is that they are supersym-
metric only up to a total derivative. In spacetimes or on worldsheets with boundary
therefore, this can lead to a non-vanishing boundary term in the supersymmetry vari-
ation. Consider in our framework the deformation of the bulk action as in (2.2). By
using the topological descent relations
                                                       +
                       {G+ , φ(2) } = ∂φ(1) ,                      ¯ (1)
                                                     {G , φ(2) } = ∂φ                (2.31)



                                                18
PSfrag replacements
                                        ψ3
                                                                                           φ
                      ψn+1                   ψ2


                                                   ψ1                                       ψ




         Figure 1: Left: The disk amplitude with n + 1 boundary insertions captures the higher
         A∞ products (2.29). Right: The disk amplitude with one bulk and one boundary insertion
         encodes the bulk to boundary obstruction map (2.33), and will also define the infinitesimal
         Abel-Jacobi map (2.62).



         we see that its supersymmetry variation on a worldsheet, Σ, with non-empty boundary
         produces a boundary term,
                    Z                 Z         Z       Z
                               +
                         +        (2)    ¯  (1)     (1)
                                                                                   φ(1)
                                                                                               
           δQ (δS) = {G + G , φ } = (∂ + ∂)φ =    dφ =                                    +c.c. (2.32)
                        Σ                      Σ                         Σ    ∂Σ
         In the context of topological field theories, the boundary term on the RHS of (2.32)
         has come to be known as “the Warner problem” [38].
            By using (2.27), the boundary U(1) charge of φ(1) |∂Σ is p = 2, and since it is still
                                                                              2
         BRST closed, we obtain a well-defined open string chiral field from Hopen . This defines
         the bulk-to-boundary obstruction map

                                         = Hclosed → Ext2 (B, B) ∼
                                m0 : T M ∼  1,1                     2
                                                                 = Hopen                         (2.33)
         which as indicated fits as a zeroth order product into the A∞ -framework. (An m1 can
         be identified as the BRST operator itself.) Diagrammatically, m0 composed with the
         open string topological metric can be defined as the disk correlator with one bulk and
         one boundary insertion, see Fig. 1.
            The further fate of the Warner problem depends on whether m0 (φ) vanishes in
         cohomology or not. If it is zero, this means that there is an open string operator ψ
         satisfying
                                          φ(1) |∂Σ = {G+       (1)
                                                       bdry , ψ }                                (2.34)
         where G+
                bdry is the boundary part of the supercharge. Hence by adding the boundary
         term                                                Z
                                             δSbdry = −               ψ (1)                      (2.35)
                                                                 ∂Σ

                                                        19
to the action, we can cancel the Warner term in the susy variation, and the brane
deforms with the closed string background.
      On the other hand, if m0 (φ) 6= 0 ∈ Ext2 (B, B), we will not be able to deform the
brane linearly with the background. However, note that by Serre duality (or worldsheet
CPT), Ext2 (B, B) ∼ = Ext1 (B, B), and it can happen that m0 (φ) is in the image of a
higher product mn for some n. In this case, by locking together an obstructed boundary
deformation with the bulk deformation, we can still deform the brane with the closed
string.
      The basic example to keep in mind is when there is just one bulk deformation, t,
and one boundary deformation, u. The superpotential is now a function of u and t,
where we can treat the latter as a parameter.
                                                              µn n+1
                       W = W(u; t) = µ0 tu −                     u   + O(un+2)                     (2.36)
                                                             n+1
where µ0 and µn are constants. If µ0 , µn 6= 0, then for t = 0, u is obstructed at order
n, while for small t 6= 0, there are n vacua u ∼ t1/n , and u is massive around each of
them.
      Let us bring this discussion to the point. If the D-brane has no marginal defor-
mations, then the bulk-to-boundary obstruction map must be zero because Ext2 = 0.
If there is a marginal deformation, and a non-trivial m0 , but the D-brane does not
obstruct the bulk deformation, then µn must be non-zero for some smallest n ≥ 2, and
the marginal boundary direction is lifted by a small bulk deformation.

2.4     Closed string holomorphic anomaly

As we have mentioned, topologically twisted N = 2 SCFTs can be coupled to 2d
(topological) gravity by identifying the supercharges and their conjugates with BRST
operators and antighosts of a critical bosonic string in which the ghost and matter
fields do not decouple. Indeed, the algebra (2.1) is all that is needed to define string
amplitudes by integration over the moduli space of Riemann surfaces.
      If M(g) denotes the moduli space of Riemann surfaces of genus g ≥ 2, and µa ,
a = 1, . . . , 3g − 3 the Beltrami differentials, we define the topological string amplitude
at genus g by the formula,
                                    Z             3g−3 Z                     Z
                          (g)
                                                  Y
                                                                     −
                                                                                        −
                      F         =          [dm]               µa G               µā G        Σg
                                                                                                   (2.37)
                                    M(g)          a=1



                                                        20
where µa G− ≡ (µa )zz̄ G−
                        zz denotes the contraction of the Beltrami’s with the antighosts,
and h· · · iΣg the 2d field theory correlator on the worldsheet Σg . By this definition,
the F (g) become sections of the line bundle L2g−2 over the CFT moduli space M. The
definition has to be modified slightly for g = 0 and g = 1 because of the presence of
ghost zero modes as usual.
    To derive the holomorphic anomaly equation, BCOV consider an infinitesimal de-
formation of the action by                   Z              Z
                                                  (2)                  (2)
                                        ti
                                                 φi + tī        φī                   (2.38)
                                                                               R (2)
and differentiate (2.37) with respect to tī . This leads to the insertion of φī =
R 2 √            +
  d z h{G+ , [G , φī ]} in the topological correlator. By contour deformation, one can
move the action of the BRST operators to the Beltrami differentials folded with the
anti-ghosts. By using the zero-mode algebra (2.1), the contractions are converted into
                         ¯ · · i on M(g) ,
differentials ∂h· · · i, ∂h·
                               3g−3
       ∂ (g)                             ∂2
                 Z                              Z      Y Z           Z
                               X
                                                                 −
                                                                             −
           F  =          [dm]        4   a ∂mā
                                                  φ ī     µ a′G       µ ā′G
                                                                                 Σg
                                                                                    (2.39)
      ∂tī         M(g)       a,ā=1
                                       ∂m              ′    a 6=a
                                                            ā′ 6=ā

Thus the anti-holomorphic derivative of F (g) has been converted into the integral of a
total derivative over M(g) . Naively, this is zero, but a careful analysis reveals that the
            R
correlator h φī · · · iΣg exhibits singularities around certain “boundary components” of
M(g) , which correspond to our Riemann surface degenerating in various ways. Two
types of degenerations are relevant for the closed string. The Riemann surface can split
in two components by developing a long tube, or a handle can pinch without leading
to a disconnected Σg . See fig. 2.
    In the derivation, one has to pay close attention to the location of the anti-chiral field
in the limit where Σg degenerates. As it turns out, the whole contribution comes from
the region where φī is sitting on the long tube. Thus, one is more nearly considering
a Riemann surface which pinches at both ends of the tube. In the limit, the pinches
are each repaired by inserting complete sets of chiral fields, φj , φk on the lower-genus
Riemann surface. The long tube is replaced with the three-point function on the sphere
with insertion of anti-chiral fields, φī , φj̄ , φk̄ . This reduces to the anti-holomorphic
Yukawa coupling Cīj̄ k̄ . The connection between the various pieces of Σg occurs via the
inverse of the topological metric g j̄j , g k̄k .
    Another important aspect of the derivation is that (for g ≥ 2!), the sums at the
location of the pinches are actually only over the marginal fields, i.e., those of charge

                                                    21
frag replacements                                         PSfrag replacements
                                           R                                                                        R
                                               φī                                                                      φī

                    Figure 2: The two degenerations that contribute to the RHS of the holomorphic anomaly
                    for closed strings.

                    (q, q̄) = (1, 1). This restriction arises from combining U(1) charge conservation on the
                                                                                (2)
                    sphere, qi + qj + qk = 3, with the fact that φa = 0 for qa = 0. Namely, integrated
                    insertion of the identity operator leads to a vanishing contribution. Since qi = 1 already,
                    the only remaining possibility is qj = qk = 1.
                        Taken together, one obtains the holomorphic anomaly equation for F (g) (g ≥ 2) as
                    derived in BCOV
                                                         1 X              (g ) (g ) 1       (g−1)
                                           ∂ī F (g) =             Cījk Fj 1 Fk 2 + Cījk Fjk ,                     (2.40)
                                                         2 g +g =g                  2
                                                           1     2


                    where the 12 is a symmetry factor, and Cījk ≡ Cīj̄ k̄ g j̄j g k̄k = Cīj̄ k̄ e 2K Gj̄j Gk̄k . The F (g)
                    with subscripts are the topological string amplitudes with insertion of the corresponding
                    chiral fields, and are defined by
                                            Z       Z           Z      3g−3 Z          Z
                                (g)                     (2)        (2)
                                                                       Y
                                                                                   −
                                                                                              −
                              Fi1 ,...,in =   [dm]    φ i1 · · · φ in         µa G       µā G                       (2.41)
                                           M(g)                                 a=1

                    As also shown in BCOV, the amplitudes with insertions can be obtained from the
                    partition functions, F (g) , by covariant differentiation,
                                                               (g)                    (g)
                                                           Fi1 ,...,in+1 = Din+1 Fi1 ,...,in                         (2.42)

                    where again D is the Zamolodchikov-Kähler covariant derivative on Symn T ∗ M ⊗L2g−2 .
                        Note that in (2.40), the sum is restricted to gi ≥ 1, which is a consequence of the
                    vanishing of the sphere one and two-point function. Namely, we only encounter stable
                    degenerations, with 3gi − 3 + ni > 0 for i = 1, 2, where ni ≡ 1 is the number of marked
                    points on the i-th component.

                                                                          22
2.5     More on the vacuum bundle. D-branes as normal functions

Let us begin this subsection with a minor comment, which will gain some importance
in the one-loop holomorphic anomaly in subsection 2.8. As we have recalled above,
topological string amplitudes at genus g are sections of the non-trivial line bundle L2g−2
over moduli space M. This arises because the ambiguity in normalizing the twisted
path-integral on the worldsheet is determined by the choice of a canonical closed string
vacuum e0 = |0iclosed . It is natural to ask whether the presence of boundaries could
introduce new ambiguities, and lead to additional twisting. In fact, there are no new
ambiguities, as can be seen from considering the topological path-integral on a disk
with a long strip attached (Fig. 3). Given |0iclosed , this defines a canonical open string
vacuum |0iopen , with a canonical normalization. As a consequence, open topological
string amplitudes at genus g with h boundaries will be sections of L2g+h−2 over M.

                                                                 |0iopen



 PSfrag replacements



Figure 3: The path-integral on the disk with a long strip attached defines a canonical open
string vacuum.



      To continue the discussion, it will be helpful to have in mind a more concrete
geometric realization of the topological string. So let us consider the B-model on a
family of Calabi-Yau manifolds, all denoted by Y . The ground states are identified
with the cohomology of Y via

                                    Hp,q ∼
                                         = H 3−p,q (Y )                             (2.43)

while the (c, c)-ring structure is determined from the identification

                                H 3−p,q (Y ) ∼
                                             = H q (Λp T Y )                        (2.44)

given by contraction with the holomorphic 3-form, Ω. The moduli space M is the
space of complex structure deformations of Y . As Y varies over M, the middle di-
mensional cohomology groups H 3 (Y ) fit together into a holomorphic vector bundle,

                                            23
which is precisely the vacuum bundle V we have discussed in subsection 2.2 above.
The decomposition (2.9) is now

                       Vm = H 3,0(Y ) ⊕ H 2,1 (Y ) ⊕ H 1,2 (Y ) ⊕ H 0,3 (Y )              (2.45)

An important point is that the decomposition (2.45) is not compatible with the holo-
morphic structure on V. Instead, consider the Hodge filtration on H 3 (Y ),

        H 3,0(Y ) = F 3 H 3 (Y ) ⊂ F 2 H 3 (Y ) ⊂ F 1 H 3 (Y ) ⊂ F 0 H 3 (Y ) = H 3(Y )   (2.46)

where
                                                           ′   ′
                                  F q H 3 (Y ) = ⊕q′ ≥q H q ,3−q (Y )                     (2.47)

is the space of three-forms with at least q holomorphic indices. The F q H 3 (Y ) do fit
together into holomorphic subbundles of V over M. In particular, F 3 H 3 (Y ) = H 3,0 (Y )
is identified with our canonical line bundle L.
   The topological metric on V is up to a sign, (−1)q , the symplectic pairing between
H 3−q,q (Y ) and H q,3−q (Y ), while the Zamolodchikov metric is identified with the Weil-
Petersson metric on M
                                                                    Z
                       Gij̄ = ∂i ∂j̄ K ,     where K = − log i              Ω∧Ω           (2.48)
                                                                        Y

The structure constants of the chiral ring are given by
                                         Z
                              Cijk = − Ω ∧ ∂i ∂j ∂k Ω                                     (2.49)
                                                 Y

The vacuum bundle V comes equipped with a real structure, which is induced from
the embedding H 3 (Y ; R) ⊂ H 3 (Y ; C). Complex conjugation acts by exchanging H q,3−q
with H 3−q,q and corresponds on the worldsheet to the CPT operator Θ.
   It can hardly be overemphasized that the starting point for much of special geome-
try and in fact the entire story of the holomorphic anomaly is the competition between
the holomorphicity of the filtration (2.46), which would make topological string ampli-
tudes holomorphic, and the reality of the decomposition (2.45), which is preferred for
maintaining unitarity of the worldsheet CFT. We will see that this is crucial when we
add boundaries as well.
   Not only do we have a real structure on H 3 (Y ; C) ⊃ H 3 (Y ; R), but we also have
an integral structure from the embedding H 3 (Y ; Z) ⊂ H 3 (Y ; R). The Gauss-Manin
connection on H 3 (Y ; C) can be characterized by the fact that it preserves this integral

                                                  24
structure. Namely, any section of H 3 (Y ; Z) is flat with respect to the Gauss-Manin
connection. On the Hodge filtration, the Gauss-Manin connection satisfies Griffiths
transversality
                                 ∇F q H 3 (Y ) ⊂ F q−1 H 3(Y )                              (2.50)

If Γ ∈ H3 (Y ; Z) is an integral 3-cycle, it defines an element in H 3 (Y ; Z) by integration
against 3-forms and duality. Of importance are the periods of the holomorphic three-
form                                                  Z
                                  Π(z) = hφ0 , Γi =         Ω(z)                            (2.51)
                                                        Γ

where z = (z i )i=1,...,n is some collection of local coordinates on M. The pairings with
the (2, 1)-forms χi can be obtained by differentiation,
                                                                   Z
                                                                          (2,1)
                  Di Π(z) = ∂i Π(z) + ∂i KΠ(z) = hφi , Γi =              χi       (z)       (2.52)
                                                                     Γ

while the overlaps with the (1, 2) and (0, 3)-forms follow (for instance) by complex
conjugation.
   It will be useful for us to introduce at this stage the so-called Griffiths intermediate
Jacobian. At any point in moduli space, we consider the complex torus

  J 3 (Y ) = H 1,2(Y ) ⊕ H 0,3 (Y )/H 3 (Y ; Z) = H 3 (Y ; C)/(F 2H 3 (Y ) + H 3 (Y ; Z))   (2.53)

(The underlying real torus is H 3 (Y ; R)/H 3 (Y ; Z), the complex structure is determined
by the complex structure on Y .) Because of the holomorphicity of the filtration (2.46),
the J 3 (Y ) fit together into a holomorphic family of complex tori, known as the inter-
mediate Jacobian fibration.
   We can now begin to ask more precisely how D-branes fit into the framework of
special geometry and the vacuum bundle over M. A-branes first.
   From the worldsheet perspective, A-branes are essential to define the integral struc-
ture on the vacuum bundle. Indeed, while the worldsheet CPT operator defines the
real structure, it does not allow the selection of an integral lattice inside of it. But
consider two A-branes A and A′ . By general principles, we can express the Witten
index in the Hilbert space of A–A′ -strings via the overlaps of the boundary states with
the Ramond ground states, which for A-branes must be taken from the B-model as we
have explained in subsection 2.3

                              trA−A′ (−1)F = hA|ea iη ab heb |A′ i                          (2.54)

                                               25
where ea is some basis of V, and η ab the inverse topological metric. Geometrically, A-
branes wrap (special) Lagrangian three-cycles in Y . Their class in H3 (Y ; Z) defines the
overlap with V via (2.51), (2.52), and their (integral!) intersection number computes
the Witten index (2.54). Thus, properly normalized A-brane boundary states define
integral sections of V.
   B-branes are more subtle. (Useful references for the geometric statements that will
follow below include [39, 40].) As we have mentioned before, the modern perspective
is that D-branes are mathematically well accommodated in certain categories endowed
with extra structure, such as the A∞ -structure we have discussed in subsection 2.3. For
our B-model on Y , the relevant category is the bounded derived category of coherent
sheaves, D b (Y ). Essentially, this includes D-branes wrapped on even-dimensional, holo-
morphic cycles carrying holomorphic vector bundles, as well as all possible “topological
bound states” of those that can be obtained by “topological tachyon condensation”.
   Our main goal is to extract holomorphic information from objects in the B-brane
category, and to relate it to the vacuum bundle V. It is in any case clear already that
the topological classification of B-branes involves ground states from the other model,
which are not contained in V. For reasons that will become completely clear only
in subsection 2.7, we want to restrict ourselves to B-branes whose overlaps with those
ground states with qrgs = −q̄rgs vanish. The point is that if those overlaps don’t vanish,
one is in danger that the corresponding A-model deformations, which are BRST exact
in the B-model, will not decouple in loop computations. For this reason, and because
it seems plausible that analogous effects can be achieved by (topological) orientifolds,
we refer to this condition as “tadpole cancellation”.
   Physically, all the holomorphic information one expects to extract from the open
string at tree-level is captured in the spacetime superpotential W for the massless fields
on the brane. The interpretation of the superpotential in A∞ -categories is quite well
understood, but depends to a large extent on gauge-fixing data of the open string field
theory [41, 37]. Gauge invariant physical information contained in the superpotential
is for example the tension of BPS domainwalls, T = ∆W. Since such domainwalls
carry no topological D-brane charge, they are precisely the physical objects satisfying
the tadpole cancellation condition from the previous paragraph. We will henceforth
restrict ourselves to such configurations.
   Consider for instance wrapping of a D5-brane on a holomorphic curve C ⊂ Y . This
B-brane carries no topological charge if its class in H2 (Y ; Z) vanishes. It can then arise


                                             26
as a domainwall between two D5-branes wrapped on two different holomorphic curves
C+ and C− in the same class if C = C+ − C− holomorphically. The tension of the BPS
domainwall is [42]                                 Z
                                           T =             Ω                               (2.55)
                                                       Γ

where Ω(z) is the holomorphic three-form and Γ is a three-chain in Y with boundary
∂Γ = C = C+ − C− . The domainwall tension depends on complex structure moduli
both explicitly through the holomorphic three-form, as well as implicitly through the
position of the curve C, which must vary in order to remain holomorphic as we vary the
complex structure. At this stage, we also allow dependence of T on any moduli of C
for fixed complex structure of Y , but we will drop this freedom in the next subsection.
   Because the holomorphic three-form is unique up to scale, formula (2.55) is well-
defined even if we think of Ω just as a representative of a cohomology class in H 3,0 (Y ).
Because Γ has a boundary, we could not integrate an arbitrary cohomology class over
it. However, next to Ω, we can do one more. Consider a class [χ(2,1) ] in H 2,1 (Y ). It is
an elementary fact from Hodge theory that F p H k ∼
                                                  = (F p Ak )c /dF p Ak−1 , where F p Ak
are the k-forms on Y with at least p holomorphic indices, (·)c refers to closed forms, and
d is the total differential. Thus we can represent [χ2,1 ] by a closed form χ(2,1) ∈ F 2 A3
and define the integral                     Z
                                                  χ(2,1)                                   (2.56)
                                              Γ

The integral does not depend on the choice of representative since under χ(2,1) →
χ(2,1) + dξ (2,0) , where ξ (2,0) is a (2, 0)-form, the integral changes by ∂Γ ξ (2,0) , and since
                                                                           R

∂Γ = C is a holomorphic curve, the integral of a (2, 0)-form over it vanishes.
   The properties we have just described are part of the definition of a Poincaré normal
function, in the sense of Griffiths [13] (see [39] for a pedagogical introduction). For-
mally, a normal function ν is a holomorphic section of the intermediate Jacobian (2.53)
satisfying the infinitesimal condition for normal functions, or Griffiths transversality,
defined as follows. If ν is any holomorphic section of J 3 (Y ) = H 3 (Y )/(F 2H 3 + H 3 (Z)),
one can choose a lift of ν as a holomorphic section ν̃ of H 3 (Y ). Then we can apply
the Gauss-Manin connection ∇ to ν̃, and Griffiths transversality for normal functions
is the statement
                                          ∇ν̃ ∈ F 1 H 3                                    (2.57)

Instead of showing that this condition is independent of the lift (which it is), let us verify
that a family of holomorphic curves indeed defines a normal function. Note that by du-

                                                  27
ality, we can identify H 3 /F 2 H 3 with (F 2 H 3 )∗ and J 3 (Y ) with (F 2 H 3 )∗ /H3 (Y ; Z). Cor-
respondingly, the integrals (2.55), (2.56) define an element of (F 2 H 3 )∗ = (H 3,0 ⊕H 2,1 )∗ ,
and the three-chain Γ with ∂Γ = C is only defined up to a three-cycle in H3 (Y ; Z).
Thus, C defines a section of the intermediate Jacobian. Finally, Griffiths transversality
(2.57) follows from the observation that when we vary the complex structure of Y , we
can describe the first order variation of C by a normal vector n ∈ NC/Y . If δΓ is the
corresponding first order variation of Γ, one has
                                  Z        Z
                                      Ω=      Ω(n) = 0                                       (2.58)
                                       δΓ        C

which again vanishes by type considerations since C is holomorphic. This is equivalent
to hΩ, ∇ν̃i = 0, and hence to (2.57).
      Normal functions also make sense for holomorphic vector bundles, and by splitting
distinguished triangles can be defined for the entire derived category D b (Y ). The
essential device that makes this possible is the notion of algebraic or holomorphic second
Chern class. Given for example a holomorphic vector bundle, we can equip it with a
hermitian metric, and thus specify a connection, A, whose curvature F = dA + A ∧ A
is of type (1, 1). The second Chern form is c2 (A) = trF ∧ F and defines a cohomology
class in H 4 (Y ; Z). If [c2 (A)] = 0, one may write c2 (A) = dCS (A), where CS (A) is
the Chern-Simons form. This way, we identify the domainwall tension with Witten’s
holomorphic Chern-Simons functional [43, 41, 44],
                                    Z
                               T = CS (A) ∧ Ω                                                (2.59)

and indeed one can show that it depends only on the holomorphic class of the vector
bundle.
      Further details on the relation of D-branes to normal functions, with an important
example, appear in [6].

2.6     Infinitesimal invariant and holomorphic anomaly on the disk

We have just seen that topologically trivial B-branes are holomorphically captured by
a normal function, namely a holomorphic section of the intermediate Jacobian (2.53)
satisfying Griffiths transversality (2.57). This association is known as the Abel-Jacobi
map. It is worthwhile pointing out that in general, one can also consider intermediate
Jacobians for 0-cycles, J 1 (Y ), and for four-cycles, J 5 (Y ). However, if Y is simply

                                                28
connected (which we assume), those Jacobians, known as the Albanese and Picard
variety, respectively, vanish. The Abel-Jacobi map was first used used for open string
disk instanton computations (on non-compact Calabi-Yau) by Aganagic and Vafa [45].
Early speculations on the relevance of the Abel-Jacobi map to mirror symmetry appear
in [46]. In this subsection, we study the relation between the Abel-Jacobi map for B-
branes and the vacuum bundle V, especially at the infinitesimal level.
   It is clear from the previous subsection that a normal function in itself cannot
completely describe the topological boundary state of a B-brane. Granting a lift of the
H 3 (Y ; Z) ambiguity, ν only defines the (0, 3) and (1, 2) components of an element of
H 3 (Y ), and this only in the quotient. To get an actual state in V, we need a lift ν̃.
   A little thought reveals that there is in fact a very natural lift of ν to all of V,
dictated by worldsheet CPT invariance. Since the latter is simply complex conjugation
acting on H 3 (Y ), we see that at the level of the pairing hΩ, νi = Γ Ω, (2.55), we are
                                                                    R

defining the lift by                      Z         Z
                              hΩ, ν̃i =       Ω=            Ω = hΩ, ν̃i             (2.60)
                                          Γ             Γ

and similarly for the (1, 2)-forms. We will henceforth denote this real lift of the normal
function also by ν.
   Before studying the full consequences of this identification, let us finally clarify
our intent to neglect open string moduli that has been lingering since (F1) in the
introduction. We have seen already in subsection 2.3 that if bulk deformations are
unobstructed by the D-brane and the obstruction map m0 is non-zero, we can remove
open string moduli by a small bulk deformation.
   To deal with the assumption that m0 is non-trivial, consider a family of homolog-
ically trivial B-branes B(w), which as a function of some local parameter w are all
holomorphic with a fixed complex structure of Y . We can define the Abel-Jacobi map
AJ (w) ∈ J 3 (Y ). By considerations similar to those around (2.58), one can show that
the first order variation of AJ (w) satisfies

                       dw AJ (w) ∈ F 1 H 3 (Y )/F 2 H 3 (Y ) ∼
                                                             = H 1,2(Y )            (2.61)

This is similar to (2.57), except that we now vary only the brane for fixed complex
structure of Y . Since the tangent space to moduli of B(w) is Ext1 (B, B) as reviewed
in subsection 2.3, the infinitesimal Abel-Jacobi map is more abstractly a map
                                                               2,2
                       α : Ext1 (B, B) = Hopen
                                          1
                                               → H 1,2 (Y ) = Hclosed               (2.62)

                                               29
Diagrammatically, by using the closed string topological metric, we can identify α with
the two point function on the disk with one boundary and one bulk insertion, see Fig.
1. Referring back to subsection 2.3, we see that the infinitesimal Abel-Jacobi map is
nothing but the dual of the bulk-to-boundary obstruction map (2.33), α = m∗0 . Thus,
if m0 vanishes, the image of B(w) in the intermediate Jacobian is independent of w,
and, if the brane does not obstruct the bulk, the corresponding normal function will
also not depend on w.
   When the B-brane is a holomorphic vector bundle, these statements are reflected
in the fact that the holomorphic Chern-Simons functional (2.59) is constant on un-
obstructed families of holomorphic connections [44]. In fact, the holomorphic Chern-
Simons functional (or, more generally, the open string field theory) and its quantization
encodes the entire deformation and obstruction theory for B-branes [47]. We are here
only concerned with its most elementary application.
   An extremely useful concept attached to normal functions in the context of infinites-
imal variation of Hodge structure is the so-called Griffiths’ infinitesimal invariant. It
was first considered by Griffiths in [14], and later refined by Voisin [15] and Green
[16]. If one insists on holomorphicity, defining the infinitesimal invariant requires some
ingenuity, because one cannot quite do it without choosing a lift of ν to H 3 (Y ) (see
[39]). But since we have given up on holomorphicity long ago, and work with the
real physical lift (2.60), we can be more pedestrian. Our main goal is to explain the
identification of the infinitesimal invariant with the disk two-point function, see (F3)
in the introduction.
   Consider a real normal function ν, and expand in a basis of the vacuum bundle,
see eq. (2.13),
                                   ν = ν 0 e0 + ν i ei + ν ī eī + ν 0̄ e0̄                      (2.63)
where reality means ν ī = ν i , ν 0̄ = ν 0 . The domainwall tension is of course T =
hΩ, νi = he0 , νi = ν 0̄ g00̄ . By utilizing the explicit form of the connection matrices in
subsection 2.2, we find

  ∇i ν = (∂i ν 0 − ∂i Kν 0 )e0 + ∂i ν l + g k̄l ∂i gmk̄ ν m − δil ν 0 el +
                                                                     
                                                                ¯
                                                   ∂i ν l̄ − Ciml ν m el̄ + ∂i ν 0̄ − Gim̄ ν m̄ e0̄ (2.64)
                                                                                              


Griffiths transversality for normal functions is the statement hΩ, ∇νi = 0, which trans-
lates into
                                Di T = ∂i T + ∂i KT = νi = gij̄ ν j̄                              (2.65)

                                                     30
The Griffiths’ infinitesimal invariant can now be defined as the following tensor in
(T ∗ M)2 ⊗ L−1 ,
                                           ∆ij := −h∇i Ω, ∇j νi                                    (2.66)

By using Griffiths transversality and the compatibility of the Gauss-Manin connection
with the symplectic metric, this is equivalent to

                                            ∆ij = hΩ, ∇i ∇j νi                                     (2.67)

which makes it obvious that ∆ij is symmetric in i and j, i.e., ∆ij ∈ Sym2 (T ∗ M) ⊗ L−1 .
From (2.64), we find explicitly

                                   ∆ij = Di Dj T − Cijk g k̄k Dk̄ T                                (2.68)

From the definition, it is clear that ∆ij vanishes identically if T is a period of the
holomorphic three-form over a (closed) three-cycle. To verify this, one has to be careful
to insert an actual real period, and not just an arbitrary complex solution of the Picard-
Fuchs equation. These notions are not equivalent since (2.68) is not holomorphic in
T . But in any event, we see that the infinitesimal invariant does not depend on how
we choose to lift the H 3 (Y ; Z) ambiguity in the definition of the normal function. It is
also invariant under monodromies in the complex structure moduli space, for the same
reason.
   To show the identification of ∆ij with the disk two-point function, we will make
use of the holomorphic anomaly. From (2.68) and the special geometry relations, it is
not hard to see that our infinitesimal invariant satisfies the distinctive equation

             ∂ī ∆jk = −Cjkl g l̄l Dī Dl̄ T + Cjkl Cīl̄m̄ g l̄l g m̄m Dm T = −Cjkl g l̄l ∆īl̄   (2.69)

where ∆k̄l̄ = ∆kl . On the other hand, the topological string amplitude on the disk with
two bulk insertions is defined by
                                             Z 1
                                  ˜ jk =                        [1]
                                  ∆                drhφj (0)φk (r)i(0,1)                           (2.70)
                                              0

where one of the insertions is fixed at 0, and we are integrating over the radial position
                                     [1]                    −
of the one-form descendant φk = 12 [G− − G , φk ] of the other. Taking a deriva-
        ˜ jk in the anti-holomorphic direction brings down the anti-chiral insertion
tive of ∆
R (2)          √            +         +
  φī = d2 z h 12 {G+ + G , [G+ − G , φī ]}. This is BRST exact in the presence of
         R



                                                      31
                                                                         R    [1]
        PSfrag replacements                                                  φk (r)
                               φj (0)




               Figure 4: The disk amplitude with two bulk insertions.


the boundary, and similarly to the derivation in subsection 2.4, we can move the BRST
                                                             +    [1]
operator to the chiral insertion, where {G+ + G , φk } = dφk . Thus we are reduced to
                                      Z 1
                                             ∂
                                                     Z
                             ˜ jk =                        [1]
                         ∂ī ∆             dr h           φī φj (0)φk (r)i(0,1)                   (2.71)
                                         0   ∂r
        [1]             +
where φī = 21 [G+ − G , φī ]. This is now a sum of two boundary terms. When φk hits
the boundary at r = 1, we obtain a term similar to the Warner term in the supersym-
metry variation of the bulk action (2.32). By our assumptions, the Warner term has
been canceled as in (2.34), in other words φk |∂Σ is BRST exact on the boundary. So
there is no contribution from r = 1. On the other hand, the boundary term at r = 0,
when φj and φk collide, can be evaluated by using the bulk chiral ring and tt∗ -fusion.
Thus,                                    Z 1
                    ˜ jk = −Cjkl g l̄l                      [1]                     ˜ īl̄
                ∂ī ∆                          drhφl̄(0)φī (r)i(0,1) = −Cjkl g l̄l ∆              (2.72)
                                          0
                                                                                             [1]
where we have made use of the fact that the angular integration of φī is trivial once
φj and φk have been fused. This shows that ∆ ˜ ij satisfies exactly the same holomor-
phic anomaly equation as ∆ij . Modulo the holomorphic ambiguity, this completes our
identification of the two-point function on the disk with the non-holomorphically lifted
Griffiths infinitesimal invariant of the normal function. We believe that this identifica-
tion also holds after the holomorphic ambiguity has been taken into account. We will
be able to verify this in the example from independent information in the A-model.
   We now have all the machinery in place to extend the holomorphic anomaly to
higher worldsheet topologies.




                                                     32
2.7       Holomorphic anomaly with D-branes

In analogy to (2.37), we want to define the open topological amplitude F (g,h) by an
integral over the moduli space M(g,h) of Riemann surfaces with genus g and h boundary
components. In this subsection, let us assume 2g + h − 2 > 0. (We have discussed the
disk amplitude in the previous subsection, and will return to the annulus amplitude
in the next.) Given such a Riemann surface Σg,h , we can close off all the boundaries
by gluing in a standard centered disk at each boundary component. The data one
is forgetting is the length of the boundary component. This describes M(g,h) as a
                              (g)
fibration over Mh , the moduli space of Riemann surfaces of genus g with h marked
points
                                                      h                               (g)
                                                 R+        → M(g,h) → Mh                                                  (2.73)
Consequentially, when thinking about the infinitesimal variations of Σg,h , we can isolate
those which only change the lengths of the boundary components, from those which
affect also the bulk of the Riemann surface. We introduce the (real) length moduli by
                                               (g)
lb , and the coordinates on Mh by ma . Let us also denote the Beltrami differentials
                                     (g)
pulled back from Mh by µa , µā , a, ā = 1, . . . 3g + h − 3, and the other ones by λb ,
b = 1, . . . h.
      We now define the topological string amplitude F (g,h) by
                      Z                       3g+h−3 Z                    Z               h
          (g,h)
                                               Y                                       − Y                     −
                                                                  −
                                                                                                   λb (G− + G ) Σ
                                                                      
      F           =                [dm][dl]                µa G               µ̄ā G                                      (2.74)
                                                                                                                    g,h
                          M(g,h)               a=1                                           b=1

It is important here that the µa are complex and can be localized away from the bound-
                                                                                                            −
ary ∂Σg,h . It therefore makes sense to contract them with the G− , G individually. On
the other hand, the λb are real, and supported near ∂Σg,h . So we need to contract
                                                                                                                −
them with the combination that is preserved at the boundary, G− + G .
      The F (g,h) are sections of L2g+h−2 over M. Recall that we assume all closed string
deformations to be unobstructed by the branes, and do not consider any other inde-
pendent open string moduli, so M is the same as before. Also as before, taking a
derivative with respect to the anti-holomorphic parameter tī brings down the BRST
                R (2) R       √          +
trivial operator φī = d2 z h{G+ , [G , φī ]} into the correlator.
      When we now pull the action of the BRST operator to the anti-ghosts, we have
                                                                                                      (g)
to distinguish whether we hit the complex Beltramis from Mh or the real ones cor-
responding to the variation of the lengths of the boundary components. In the latter
case, we can only contract with the BRST charge that is preserved at the boundary,

                                                              33
                                                                          [1]                  +
                    and remain with an insertion of φī ≡ 12 [G+ − G , φī ] in the correlator [2]. Thus, we
                    obtain
                                                                " 3g+h−3
                                                                                  ∂2
                                           Z                                                   Z         Y Z                               Z
                               (g,h)
                                                                    X
                                                                                                                                   −
                                                                                                                                                       −
                       ∂ī F           =             [dm][dl]                 4                    φī                    µ G a′               µā′ G
                                           M(g,h)                      a,ā=1
                                                                                ∂ma ∂mā
                                                                                                         a′ 6=a
                                                                                                         ā′ 6=ā
                                                                                                                    h
                                                                                                                    Y                          −
                                                                                                                          λb (G− + G ) Σ +
                                                                                                                                                       g,h
                                                                                                                    b=1
                                                                       3g+h−3 Z
                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                     d
                                                           Z                                   Z
                                               X                 [1]
                                                                        Y
                                                                                         −                    − Y                                 −
                                                                                                                              λb′ (G− + G ) Σ
                                                                                           
                                                   2 b         φī                µa G              µ̄ā G
                                               b=1
                                                    dl                  a=1
                                                                                                                                                             g,h
                                                                                                                     b′ 6=b

                                                                                                                                                               (2.75)

                    (Strictly speaking, there are also terms which mix the base and the fiber directions of
                    M(g,h) , but those can be shown to lead to a vanishing boundary contribution. The
                    arguments are similar to those at the end of section 3.1 of BCOV.)




frag replacements                                                    PSfrag replacements
                                                 R                                                                                                            R
                                                     φī                                                                                                           φī

                    Figure 5: When adding boundaries, the two degenerations from Fig. 2 remain unaffected.

                       Now we have to analyze the contribution from the boundary of M(g,h) . As could be
                    expected, the closed string degenerations familiar from subsection 2.4 remain essentially
                    unaffected, see Fig. 5. The only difference is that when we split the Riemann surface
                    in two pieces, we have to keep track of the distribution of the various components
                    of ∂Σg,h . This leads to a sum over (g1 , h1 ), (g2 , h2 ) with g1 + g2 = g, h1 + h2 = h.
                    The condition to have a stable degeneration imposes the additional restriction that
                    3gi + 3hi /2 − 2 > 0 for i = 1, 2, but in particular allows gi = 0 as long as hi ≥ 2.
                       There are three types of degenerations which are specific to the presence of open
                    strings. The first two arise when the Riemann surface develops a very long strip,
                    which can either split the Riemann surface in two pieces, or lead to the merging of two

                                                                                  34
                    boundary components. It is not hard to see that those degenerations actually do not
                    contribute. The presence of the very long strip projects the intermediate open strings to
                    their ground states, and we can therefore replace the strip by the insertion of complete
                    sets of chiral boundary fields, ψa ψb , contracted with the open string topological metric
                    η ab . But notice that when 2g + h − 2 > 0, at least one of the boundary fields has to be
                    an integrated insertion, and as in the closed string case, the only contribution could
                    have come from marginal (p = 1) open string states. Since those are generically absent,
                    we conclude that degenerations with long strips do not contribute.




frag replacements                         PSfrag replacements
                                                   R [1]                                 R     [1]
                                                     φī                                     φī

                    Figure 6: The degeneration with an intermediate open string does not contribute generically.
                    This leaves only the degeneration in which the length of a boundary component shrinks to
                    zero size, or, equivalently, the boundary component is separated by a long tube.

                       The final degeneration we have to take into account arises when the length of
                    a boundary components shrinks to zero, i.e., lb → 0 in (2.75), see Fig. 6. This is
                    conformally equivalent to pulling the boundary very far from the rest of the Riemann
                    surface via a long tube, at which point it looks more like a closed string degeneration
                    of the type we have seen before. Strictly speaking, however, it would not make sense to
                    pinch off the tube because this would have corresponded to a non-stable degeneration
                    (in real codimension 2!) involving a disk one-point function. Complementarily, we note
                                                                                   [1]
                    that as long as the integration of the anti-chiral field φī is away from the long tube,
                    the intermediate closed string is projected onto the ground states. As explained in the
                    previous subsection, our construction is such that all these one-point functions vanish
                    (by tadpole cancellation or Griffiths transversality).
                                                                             [1]
                       Thus, we only remain with the integration of φī over the long tube. Note that
                                                [1]
                    the angular position of φī       does not matter after we pull the tube infinitely long.
                    The infinitely long tube projects the closed string onto their ground states which can

                                                                  35
again be represented by inserting a complete set of chiral fields (only marginal ones
contributing). So the rest of the Riemann surface has an additional chiral insertion
of φj , while the long tube becomes nothing but the anti-topological disk two-point
function,                                               Z 1
                                                                [1]
                                              ∆īj̄ =         hφī (r)φj̄ (0)i0,1 ,        (2.76)
                                                         0
familiar from the previous subsection. The connection to the bulk of the Riemann
surface occurs via the inverse topological metric g j̄j . This way, we arrive at our final
expression for the holomorphic anomaly equation in the presence of D-branes,
                        1 X              (g ,h ) (g ,h ) 1     (g−1,h)         (g,h−1)
        ∂ī F (g,h) =             Cījk Fj 1 1 Fk 2 2 + Cījk Fjk      − ∆jī Fj       ,   (2.77)
                        2 g +g =g                        2
                           1   2
                          h1 +h2 =h

where we have of course defined

                                              ∆jī ≡ ∆īj̄ g j̄j = ∆īj̄ e K Gj̄j          (2.78)

and the F (g,h) with subscripts are the amplitudes with closed string insertions as before.
      We call eq. (2.77) the “extended holomorphic anomaly equation”. It would be very
interesting to clarify in greater detail the role played by marginal open string operators
in this equation. As we have mentioned, it seems reasonable to expect that actual open
string moduli do not enter the F (g,h) at all. Massless open string fields with a higher
order superpotential however will lead to additional singularities at isolated points in
the moduli space, as we will see in examples in the second half of the paper. But
before that, let us conclude this first half by tying up a few loose ends concerning the
extended holomorphic anomaly.

2.8     Holomorphic anomaly at one loop

In our derivation so far, we have factored out the one-loop amplitudes, on the torus
and the annulus for closed and open strings, respectively. These amplitudes are some-
what exceptional, because information enters which is slightly external to the B-model
proper. Nevertheless, they fit in the general framework, as we now explain.
      The holomorphic anomaly for the closed string one-loop amplitude was derived in
[1]. It takes the form

                                        (1)                   1          χ
                                   ∂ī Fj     = ∂ī ∂j F (1) = TrCī Cj − Gj ī            (2.79)
                                                              2          24

                                                                36
Here, negative χ is the Euler characteristic of the Calabi-Yau manifold under consider-
ation. Since χ = 2(h21 (Y ) − h11 (Y )), the holomorphic anomaly knows not only about
the vacuum bundle (of rank 2h21 +2), but also about the total number of ground states,
which is not part of the special geometry.
       In (2.79), the second term comes from the collision of the anti-chiral and the chiral
insertion (a special case of the holomorphic anomaly with insertions, see subsection
2.9), while the first comes from the degeneration of the torus to a very long tube. It
is important to note that the Tr in this first term is over the entire vacuum bundle,
and not just over the marginal directions. By using the explicit form of the chiral ring
multiplication matrices (2.15), one finds

                                    (1)    1             χ
                                          = Cīkl Cjkl −
                                                               
                               ∂ī Fj                       − 1 Gj ī                          (2.80)
                                           2             24
The first term can be viewed as the usual closed string factorization contribution,
while the −1 in the second term comes from the propagation of the unique ground
state of zero charge (q, q̄) = (0, 0). The insertion of the identity operator leads to a
non-trivial contribution in this case because after factorization, one is dealing with a
sphere correlator with three fixed insertions, and the unintegrated identity operator is
non-trivial.
       Much the same story holds for the open string as well. The contribution to the
holomorphic anomaly of the annulus diagram from factorization in the open string
channel was in fact already derived by BCOV. It was found to be

                               ∂ī ∂j F (0,2) = ∂ī ∂j log det gopen + · · ·                   (2.81)

where gopen is the tt∗ -metric on the space of open string ground states. We have so
far been able to neglect the open string ground states because of the assertion that
there are generically no open string moduli, and non-marginal open string operators
do not contribute to the geometry of the vacuum bundle or the holomorphic anomaly
for 2g + h − 2 > 0. For the one-loop amplitudes, however, the open string identity
operator will also propagate for the same reason as in the closed string.
       It is not too hard to determine the tt∗ -metric on the open string ground states of
zero charge.4 But before that, let us briefly recall the description of the open string
chiral ring and the topological metric. Categorically, we can identify the charge 0 sector
   4
    Discussions with Andrew Neitzke were essential in clarifying this point, and indeed for this entire
subsection. I would also like to thank Kentaro Hori for useful feedback on the argument.

                                                   37
of the open string chiral ring as Ext0 (B, B). If B corresponds to a holomorphic vector
bundle E, we have the simpler identification

                                  Ext0 (B, B) ∼
                                              = H 0 (EndE)                             (2.82)

We can think physically of the Ext0 (B, B) as the unbroken generators of the gauge
group. Let us also recall that the topological metric (Serre pairing) between H 0 (EndE)
and H 3 (EndE) is given (up to a sign) by
              Z
     hψ|ψ i = Tr(ψ ∧ ψ ′ ) ∧ Ω ,
           ′
                                       for ψ ∈ H 0 (EndE), ψ ′ ∈ H 3 (EndE)            (2.83)

Let us choose a basis (fa ), a = 1, . . . N of Ext0 (B, B), where we allow for a generic
N = dim Ext0 (B, B) ≥ 1.
   To determine the tt∗ -metric gopen in the p = 0 sector, it is better to work with the
supersymmetric (Ramond) ground states. They differ from (2.82) by spectral flow,

                                  H0 ∼
                                            p
                                     = H 0 ( KY ⊗ EndE)                                (2.84)
        √
where   KY is the squareroot of the canonical bundle. So as a bundle over M, the
charge 0 ground states of the open string live in the bundle L1/2 ⊗ g, where g ∼
                                                                               =
H 0 (EndE) is a trivial rank N bundle. By the arguments at the beginning of subsection
2.5, we do not expect any new ambiguities in the open string sector. Therefore, the
tt∗ -metric on this space must be
                                                   Z          1/2             1/2
                 (gopen )ab̄ = hΘfb |fa i = δab̄            Ω∧Ω     = δab̄ g00̄        (2.85)
                                                        Y

where g00̄ = e −K is the closed string topological metric in the zero charge sector (2.48),
and δab̄ is a constant matrix (independent of the moduli). In particular,

                                                               N
                                  ∂ī ∂j log det gopen =         Gj ī                 (2.86)
                                                               2
where Gj ī is the Weil-Petersson metric on M.
   Returning to the dots in (2.81), there are two possible sources for additional contri-
butions. The first comes from the collision between the chiral and anti-chiral insertion,
but this is easily seen to not contribute. The open counterpart of the Euler character-
istic χ(Y ) is the Witten index tr(−1)F in the space of B–B strings, and this vanishes
because the intersection pairing is anti-symmetric for ĉ = 3.

                                                   38
   The final source of contributions to the right hand side of (2.81) comes from factor-
ization in the closed string channel, in other words from shrinking the inner boundary
of the annulus to zero size. This is the contribution that is also present in the higher
topologies in the previous subsection. Thus, we arrive at the following holomorphic
anomaly equation for the annulus amplitude:
                            (0,2)                                    N
                       ∂ī Fj       = ∂ī ∂j F (0,2) = −∆jk ∆kī +     G          (2.87)
                                                                     2 j ī
   It was also shown in BCOV that the one-loop topological amplitudes are given by
holomorphic Ray-Singer torsion, and it was argued that the holomorphic anomalies
at one loop are equivalent to the Quillen anomaly. This connection gives a further
check on our result (2.87), although it has to be said that most of the issues related
to Ray-Singer torsion have apparently not been studied for the most general objects
in the derived category. In the following somewhat tentative comments, we consider
the open string situation, and tacitly assume that we are dealing with a holomorphic
vector bundle.
   In general, the Quillen anomaly gives a formula for the curvature of the Quillen
metric on the (derived) determinant bundle of a family of hermitian vector bundles E
over a family of Kähler manifolds Y. The Quillen metric differs from the Ray-Singer
torsion by factors of the L2 -metric on the cohomology, effectively moving the second
term in (2.87) to the LHS of the holomorphic anomaly equation. The formula is [48]
                                                 Z
                      ¯
                                          
                     ∂∂ log || · ||Quillen = 2πi   Td(Y)ch(E)|(1,1)          (2.88)
                                                      Y

and means that we are to compute the Todd and Chern forms of the family with
respect to the given metrics on E and Y, integrate over the fiber Y and take the
(1, 1)-piece on the base of the family. In the case of our interest, the bundles E are
typically endomorphism bundles of topologically trivial holomorphic vector bundles. In
this situation, the only contribution to (2.88) is expected to come from the algebraic
second Chern class. This is precisely the quantity that we are computing in terms of
the normal function and its infinitesimal invariant, as explained in subsection 2.6.
   This identifies the RHS of (2.88) with the first term in (2.87). But we can in fact
be even more precise about this. It appears (see, e.g., [49, 50]) that the curvature
of the Quillen metric on the determinant bundle can often be interpreted as a metric
on moduli space of the corresponding geometric objects. The holomorphic anomaly
of the torus amplitude (2.79) in this context is computing simply the Weil-Petersson

                                                39
              χ
metric (times 24 ) on the complex structure moduli space itself. The moduli space of
the Calabi-Yau with a B-brane over it can naturally be viewed geometrically as the
image of the normal function as a section of the intermediate Jacobian fibration (2.53).
It is not hard to see that the metric on the normal function that is induced from the
tt∗ -metric on the vacuum bundle coincides with the RHS of (2.87), in precise agreement
with the above mentioned interpretation of the Quillen anomaly.

2.9     Holomorphic anomaly with insertions

As in the closed string case, we can consider open topological string amplitudes with
insertions of chiral operators in the bulk of the Riemann surface. These amplitudes
are defined by
                Z            Z                Z            3g+h−3 Z                   Z               h
    (g,h)                          (2)               (2)
                                                            Y                                      − Y                 −
                                                                              −
                                                                                                           λb (G− + G ) Σ
                                                                                  
  Fi1 ,...,in =                  φ i1 · · ·        φ in                µa G               µ̄ā G
                                                                                                                               g,h
                  M(g,h)                                    a=1                                      b=1
                                                                                                                            (2.89)
and can also be obtained from the partition functions by covariant differentiation
                                                    (g,h)                     (g,h)
                                                  Fi1 ,...,in+1 = Din+1 Fi1 ,...,in                                         (2.90)

The main reason for introducing these amplitudes here is that they will arise in the next
section when we solve the holomorphic anomaly equation. It is then useful to know
the holomorphic anomaly equations satisfied by these amplitudes with insertions, and
that the relations in (2.90) are consistent with the special geometry.
      We have, cf., eq. (3.15) in BCOV

        (g,h)         1 X             X       1       (g1 ,h1 )         (g2 ,h2 )            1 jk (g−1,h)
  ∂ī Fi1 ,...,in =             Cījk                Fjiσ(1) ...,iσ(s) Fkiσ(s+1) ,...,iσ(n) + Cī Fjki1 ,...,in
                      2 g +g =g       s,σ
                                          s!(n − s)!                                         2
                         1   2
                        h1 +h2 =h
                                                                                      n
                                  (g,h−1)                                                            (g,h)
                                                                                      X
                          − ∆jī Fji1,...,in − (2g + h − 2 + n − 1)                         Gis ī Fi1 ,...,is−1 ,is+1 ,...,in (2.91)
                                                                                      s=1

The following relations are useful to verify consistency of (2.90) with the relations of
special geometry (namely, the curvature formula (2.22)),

                                                      Dl Cījk = 0
                                                                                                                            (2.92)
                                                       Dl ∆jī = −Cījk ∆kl
      Finally, we note that the holomorphic anomaly on the disk, (2.69) can be viewed as
a special case of the general holomorphic anomaly equation (2.91). Thus, just as the

                                                                  40
holomorphic anomaly for higher-point function n ≥ 4 on the sphere is equivalent to
the statements of special geometry [2], we consider (2.69) as the open string analogue
of special geometry.

2.10   Solution of extended holomorphic anomaly

In BCOV, it was shown that the closed string holomorphic anomaly equation can be
solved by a recursive procedure that progressively moves the anti-holomorphic deriva-
tive to lower and lower genus amplitudes. The resulting expressions allow a very in-
teresting interpretation as Feynman diagrams. However, the number of terms quickly
grows exponentially with the genus, and this is not very tractable in practice. More
recently, Yamaguchi and Yau [17] have shown that in fact all closed topological string
amplitudes are polynomial of a certain degree in a finite number of generators, which
is more pleasant for calculations. It seems almost inevitable that a similar statement
holds for the extended holomorphic anomaly as well. We will however not attempt this
here, and rather solve the extended holomorphic anomaly in the same way as BCOV.
   Because of the symmetry of Dī Cj̄ k̄l̄ ∈ Sym4 (T̄ ∗ M) ⊗ L̄−2 , one can locally integrate

                                       Cīj̄ k̄ = Dī Dj̄ Dk̄ S̃                      (2.93)

where S̃ ∈ L̄−2 . Namely,

                       Cījk = Cīj̄ k̄ e 2K Gj̄j Gk̄k = ∂ī Gm̄j ∂m̄ Gn̄k ∂n̄ S      (2.94)

where S = e 2K S̃ ∈ L2 . The relations satisfied by the quantities

                        S,       S j = Gj̄j ∂j̄ S ,         S jk = Gj̄j ∂j̄ S k       (2.95)

play the key role in moving the anti-holomorphic derivative to the lower genus ampli-
tudes, necessary for solving the holomorphic anomaly equation. Explicit expressions
for the S, S j and S jk can be found in BCOV.
   We can proceed very similarly in the open string. Since Dī ∆j̄ k̄ ∈ (T̄ ∗ M)3 ⊗ L̄−1 is
symmetric in all three indices, we can write

                                                          ˜
                                          ∆īj̄ = Dī Dj̄ ∆                           (2.96)

     ˜ ∈ L̄−1 . Then
with ∆
                               ∆jī = ∆īj̄ e K Gj̄j = ∂ī Gk̄j ∂k̄ ∆                 (2.97)

                                                 41
             ˜ ∈ L. The key quantities analogous to (2.95) are
with ∆ = e K ∆

                                   ∆     and ∆j = Gj̄j ∂j̄ ∆                      (2.98)

Explicit expressions for the ∆ and ∆j can be obtained as follows. From the holomorphic
anomaly of the disk amplitude,

                                        ∂ī ∆jk = −Cjkl ∆lī                      (2.99)

we see that since Cjkl is holomorphic,

                                    Cjkl∆l = −∆jk + fjk                          (2.100)

where fjk is a holomorphic ambiguity. As in BCOV, we expect that by a judicious
choice of fjk , the Yukawa coupling in (2.100) can be inverted, and we can solve for ∆l ,
given ∆jk . If there is only one modulus as in our main example the quintic, we can set
f11 = 0 and obtain
                                                     ∆11
                                          ∆1 = −                                 (2.101)
                                                     C111
To get an expression for ∆ itself, consider

                        ∂ī Dk ∆j = −Cījm Ckml ∆l + δkj Glī ∆l − Dk ∆jī       (2.102)

where we have just used the special geometry relation, and ∂ī ∆j = ∆jī . Using (2.100)
and the second equation in (2.92), this is

                                 = −Cījm fkm + δkj ∂ī ∆                        (2.103)

After summing over j, k, we get
                                       1
                                         Dk ∆k + S mk fmk + f
                                                              
                               ∆=                                                (2.104)
                                       n
where n = dimM, and f is another holomorphic ambiguity. Let us use these results to
solve the extended holomorphic anomaly equation in some representative examples.
   For the annulus, (2.87) we find
                                                N
                     ∂ī ∂j F (0,2) = ∂ī −∆jk ∆k +∂j K − Cjkl ∆lī ∆k
                                                       
                                                2
                                                1            N
                                = ∂ī −∆jk ∆k − Cjkl ∆k ∆l + ∂j K
                                                                       
                                                                                 (2.105)
                                                2             2
                                       1                 N
                                = ∂ī − (∆jk + fjk )∆k + ∂j K
                                                                
                                       2                 2
                                                42
where we have used (2.100) in the last step. This gives F (0,2) up to a holomorphic
ambiguity.
    The next more complicated cases are (g, h) = (1, 1) and (0, 3). Let’s do F (1,1) .
                  1             (1,0)
    ∂ī F (1,1) = Cījk ∆jk − Fj ∆jī
                  2
                      1             (1,0)    1          1            χ
                = ∂ī S jk ∆jk − Fj ∆j + S jk Cjkl∆lī + Cjkl Cīkl −    − 1 Gj ī ∆j
                                                                             
                      2                        2         2            24
                      1 jk          (1,0) j   1         χ
                = ∂ī S ∆jk − Fj ∆ + Cjkl S kl ∆j −
                                                                  
                                                           −1 ∆
                      2                       2         24
                                                                                  (2.106)

For F (0,3) , the result is

                     (0,2)          N    1           1
      F (0,3) = −Fj          ∆j +     ∆ − ∆jk ∆j ∆k − Cjkl ∆j ∆k ∆l + hol . amb.            (2.107)
                                    2    2           6
These results admit an interpretation in terms of Feynman graphs similar to the ones
in BCOV.



                     1                               1
                 =                    −          +                −       + hol . amb.      (2.108)
                     2                               2



                                                    1                 1
                 =−                  +          −                 −            + hol . amb. (2.109)
                                                    2                 6


where
                                    = S ij ,             = ∆i ,           =∆                (2.110)

and all other conventions are as in BCOV. It should not be hard to show that such a
graphical expansion is valid for all, (g, h).


3    Open Topological String Amplitudes on the Real Quintic

                                          X := {P (z) = 0} ⊂ P4                               (3.1)

where P is a homogeneous polynomial of degree 5 in 5 variables z1 , . . . , z5 . Our interest
is in the A-model on X, which depends on the complexified Kähler parameter t of X.


                                                     43
Assume that X is real in the sense that all coefficients of P are real (or have the same
phase). Then the real locus
                                          L = {zi = z̄i } ⊂ X                             (3.2)

                                                                      zi , we find L ∼
                                                                     P 5
is a Lagrangian submanifold. If X is Fermat, P (z) =                                 = RP3 . To
wrap an A-brane on L, we need to specify a flat gauge field, for which there are two
choices because H1 (L; Z) = Z2 . The BPS domainwalls between the corresponding
worldvolume vacua are classified by those classes in H2 (X; L) ∼
                                                               = Z with non-trivial
image in H1 (L; Z). Modulo H2 (X; Z), the tension of those domainwalls is for large t
given by [4]
                                    t     1 15 1/2         
                                  T (t) =
                                      ±     + 2q + ···                             (3.3)
                                    2     4 π
where q ≡ e 2πit and the dots, which are of higher order in q, correspond to corrections
from worldsheet (disk) instantons.
      The domainwall tension T (t) effectively computes the topological string amplitudes
on the disk, as we have explained in the previous section. More precisely, the relation
of T (t) to topological amplitudes is similar to the relation between the genus 0 pre-
potential F (0) and topological amplitudes on the sphere, which can be obtained by
differentiation. We will here compute topological string amplitudes for higher world-
sheet topologies, with boundary on the real quintic, by using the extended holomorphic
anomaly equation and the tree-level data (3.3).

3.1     Conventions

There is also a B-model description of the above situation.5 The mirror quintic Y is
obtained from the one-parameter family of quintics

                   {W = x51 + x52 + x53 + x54 + x55 − 5ψx1 x2 x3 x4 x5 = 0} ⊂ P4          (3.4)

after a (Z5 )3 quotient. The B-model can be equivalently described as a Landau-
Ginzburg model with worldsheet superpotential W . The mirror of L with its two
vacua is a twin family of matrix factorizations of W , described in [23, 6].
      For the appropriate choice of holomorphic three-form, the Picard-Fuchs operator
for the family Y is

                          L = θ4 − 5z(5θ + 1)(5θ + 2)(5θ + 3)(5θ + 4)                     (3.5)
  5
      Our conventions follow, with minor changes, those of [3, 2], and later [18].


                                                    44
where z = (5ψ)−5 , and θ = zd/dz. As shown in [4, 5, 6], the domainwall tension
satisfies the inhomogeneous Picard-Fuchs equation
                                                 15 √
                                     LT (z) =         z                                 (3.6)
                                                16π 2
This equation of course determines T only up to a solution of the homogeneous Picard-
Fuchs equation. This is more ambiguity than we can tolerate when we lift the normal
function from the intermediate Jacobian J 3 (Y ) = H 3 (Y ; C)/(F 2 H 3 (Y ) + H 3 (Y ; Z)) to
H 3 (Y ; R) ⊂ H 3 (Y ; C), see subsection 2.6. Indeed, not any arbitrary complex linear
combination of solutions of the Picard-Fuchs equation can be obtained by integrating Ω
over an actual real three-cycle of Y . However note that the disk information enters the
extended holomorphic anomaly via the infinitesimal invariant (2.68), which is invariant
under adding to T a solution of the homogeneous Picard-Fuchs equation corresponding
to an arbitrary real (but not necessarily integral) combination of periods. In any case,
we know from (3.3) exactly which solution of (3.6) we want around large volume, and
by analytical continuation we will know the reality properties of T (z) also around other
points in moduli space.
   When analyzing the physical interpretation of topological string amplitudes in var-
ious regions of moduli space, one should do so by expanding in the so-called canonical
coordinates appropriate for the region of interest. In this “holomorphic limit”, the
F (g,h) become holomorphic function of the canonical coordinates, which is indeed re-
quired for interpreting the amplitudes in terms of a 4-dimensional effective action.
   Consider a point m ∈ M defined by some local coordinates z = z̄ = 0. Canonical
coordinates and an accompanying canonical gauge for the holomorphic three-form [2]
are defined by the property that the connection coefficients and all their holomorphic
derivatives vanish to order O(z̄) around m. Canonical coordinates always exist and are
the Kähler analogue of geodesic normal coordinates in Riemannian geometry. (Around
singular points in M, some care is required to remove the most divergent terms, but
this can always be done.)
   To take the holomorphic limit of open topological string amplitudes, we proceed
as follows. We note again that the infinitesimal invariant (2.68) is invariant under
modifying T by a real linear combination of periods. If n = dimM, there are (2n + 2)
real periods, ̟i , i = 1, . . . , 2n+2. Around a generic point in M, this freedom is enough
to find a real linear combination

                                 T̃ = T + αi ̟i      αi real                            (3.7)

                                             45
such that T˜ together with all its first holomorphic derivatives vanish to first order at
m. Therefore, Dk̄ T̃ = O(z̄) and the holomorphic limit of (2.68) is simply
                                     lim ∆ij = lim Di Dj T̃ = ∂i ∂j T˜                   (3.8)
                                     z̄→0           z̄→0

where the latter equality holds with respect to canonical coordinates and three-form
gauge. This is how we will do our calculations below.
   Let’s summarize what we know already. The Yukawa coupling on the quintic is in
the Candelas gauge given by
                                                             54 ψ 2
                                               Cψψψ =                                    (3.9)
                                                            1 − ψ5
and the Euler character is
                                             χ ≡ χ(X) = −200                           (3.10)
We can use the same propagators as in BCOV,
             1
    S ψψ =      ∂ψ log Gψ̄ψ (ψe K )2
                                     
           Cψψψ
             1                 2
     Sψ =         ∂ψ log(ψe K ) − Dψ ∂ψ log(ψe K )
                                                   
                                                                             (3.11)
           Cψψψ
                 1            1                           1          1
       S = S ψ − Dψ S ψψ − (S ψψ )2 Cψψψ ∂ψ log(ψe K ) + Dψ S ψ + S ψψ S ψ Cψψψ
                                           
                 2            2                           2          2
while our terminators are given by the expressions in subsection 2.10
                                              ∆ψψ
                                       ∆ψ = −
                                              Cψψψ                           (3.12)
                                                    ∆ = Dψ ∆ψ
The solutions of the extended holomorphic anomaly for low (g, h) are,
                     (0,2)             1          (0,2)
                   Fψ = −∆ψψ ∆ψ + ∂ψ K + fψ
                                       2
                     (1,1)     (1,0) ψ    χ
                                            − 1 ∆ + f (1,1)
                                                
                   F       = −Fψ ∆ −                                                   (3.13)
                                         24
                               (0,2)    1     1
                   F (0,3) = −Fψ ∆ψ + ∆ − ∆ψψ ∆ψ ∆ψ + f (0,3)
                                        2     3
       (0,2)
Here fψ        , f (1,1) , and f (0,3) are holomorphic ambiguities which for reasons explained
in more detail below, we parametrize as follows
                             (0,2)          (0,2)
                            fψ      = A0 ∂ψ log(ψ −5 − 1)
                                      √ (1,1)        √ (1,1) ψ 5/2
                            f (1,1) = 5A0 ψ −5/2 + 5A1                                 (3.14)
                                                            1 − ψ5
                                      √ (0,3)        √ (0,3) ψ 5/2
                            f (0,3) = 5A0 ψ −5/2 + 5A1
                                                            1 − ψ5

                                                           46
3.2   Large volume expansion

The large complex structure point ψ → ∞, z → 0 is a point of maximal unipotent
monodromy and the most convenient for finding an integral basis of periods. Such a
basis is determined by [3],
                     ∞
                     X (5m)!
       0
      X = ̟0 (z) =            5
                                zm
                     m=0
                         (m!)
                                            ∞
                       1 h                 X   (5m)! m                            i
   X 1 = ̟1 (z) =         ̟0 (z) log z + 5           z    Ψ(1 +   5m) −  Ψ(1  + m)
                     2πi                   m=1
                                               (m!)5
              5 h
   F1 = −             ̟0 log2 z + (1540z + 1620450z 2 + · · · ) log z
           2(2πi )2                                                                   (3.15)
                                                4208174 2          i   25       11
                                    + 1150z +            z + · · · + ̟0 − ̟1
                                                   2                   12        2
              5 h
     F0 =             ̟0 log3 z + (2310z + 2430675z 2 + · · · ) log2 z + (3450z+
           6(2πi )3
 12624525 2                            9895125 2         i 25          25i ζ(3)
          z + · · · ) logz − 6900z −            z + · · · + ̟1 −                ̟0
    2                                      2                 12           π3
The canonical coordinate at large complex structure is the special coordinate
                                              ̟1
                                         t=                                          (3.16)
                                              ̟0
and taking the holomorphic limit amounts to putting
                                                                dt
                          e −K = ̟0 ,              Gψψ̄ = 2πi                        (3.17)
                                                                dψ
in the formulas like (3.11) and (3.13). The prepotential of the quintic is in this gauge
and coordinate
                h 5    11   25 25i ζ(3)     1             4876875 2        i
 F (0) = (2πi )3 − t3 − t2 + t−         +         2875q +        q  +· · ·    (3.18)
                  6    4    12   2π 3     (2πi )3            8

where q ≡ e 2πit . Turning to the real quintic, we have found the domainwall tension to
be the solution of (3.6) with asymptotics
                           ∞
                 ̟1 ̟0 15 X Γ(7/2 + 5m) Γ(3/2)5
                   −   − 2                        z m+1/2                            (3.19)
                 2   4  π m=0  Γ(7/2) Γ(3/2 + m)5

The corresponding A-model expansion is
                         ht 1       2            4600 3/2         i
                                           1/2
              T = (2πi )2 − +          30q     +     q    + · · ·                    (3.20)
                          2 4 (2πi )2              3

                                            47
Note that taking the holomorphic limit of the infinitesimal invariant is particularly
simple at large volume. Since (3.19) differs from a real (although not integral) period
only in exponentially small instanton corrections, we can compute ∆ψψ in the holo-
morphic limit (cf., (3.8)) simply by forgetting the ̟0 and ̟1 contribution in (3.19).
We find

         ∆tt = lim e K (Gψψ̄ )−2 ∆ψψ = 15q 1/2 + 6900q 3/2 + 13603140q 5/2 + · · ·                          (3.21)
                  ψ̄→∞


and can now plug all this data into (3.13).
   To fix the holomorphic ambiguity, we can make use of the enumerative interpreta-
tion of the topological string amplitudes in terms of BPS invariants [19, 20, 21]. To
adapt the general multicover formula from [21] to our situation, we have to take into
account that the only one-cycle on L by which we can classify the boundary data of
BPS invariants is a torsion cycle. A most natural conjecture is that when we expand
the F (g,h) as
         ∞                                   ∞
         X                                   X     X          (g,h) 1
                                                                                   kgs 2g+h−2 kd/2
               gs2g+h−2 F (g,h) = (−1)h−1                    nd             2 sin              q            (3.22)
         g=0                                 g=0 d≡h mod 2
                                                                   k                 2
                                                   k odd

     (g,h)
all nd         should be integer. Notice that this multicover formula (as those in [21]) does
not mix worldsheets with different numbers of boundaries. Also note that we have
neglected any constant map contributions which would show up at d = 0. We expect
                                                                                            (0,1)
that there are such contributions only at (g, h) = (0, 1), where n0                                 = 12 (see [4]),
                                   (0,2)
and (g, h) = (0, 2), where n0               is given by ordinary (Reidemeister, or analytic Ray-
Singer) torsion of L. Both contributions drop out of the higher-loop computations. The
statement that the expansion (3.22) is regular means that the holomorphic ambiguities
should all vanish as ψ → ∞. This is satisfied by our ansatz (3.14).

A correction
It has recently become clear [51] that an ansatz of the form (3.22) is probably too opti-
mistic. Let us briefly summarize the main objection in the current context. Naively, one
                                           (g,h)
would attempt to identify the nd    as BPS invariants enumerating oriented Riemann
surfaces of genus g with h boundary components in the class d ∈ H2 (X, L; Z) ∼
                                                                             = Z, such
that each boundary component is mapped to the non-trivial class of H1 (L; Z) ∼
                                                                             = Z2 .
At the level of Gromov-Witten invariants, it should indeed be possible to distinguish
different topologically non-trivial boundary components by coupling to Wilson line

                                                     48
observables on an appropriate stack of D-branes. When some boundary components
are trivial in H1 (L; Z), one expects a mixing with unoriented Riemann surfaces. The
physics definition of the integral invariants, however, makes explicit reference to a
certain supersymmetric string background. As a consequence, it appears that when
H1 (L; Z) is torsion (or, more generally, when open string vacua are discrete) one can
extract integral invariants from the topological string amplitudes only when unoriented
worldsheets are included from the beginning and the number of D-branes is fixed, thus
                                                          (g,h)
precluding the measurement of indivual nd                         . See [51] for a complete discussion of
these issues, as well as the relationship to real enumerative invariants.
      In retrospect, it is somewhat surprising that with the naive ansatz (3.22), the
ambiguities parameterized in (3.14) can in fact be fixed in such a way that the expansion
coefficients are nevertheless integer, and moreover satisfy the low-degree vanishing
                (g,h)                                      (2g+h−1,0)
relation that nd         must vanish whenever nd                           does. This constraint arises from
the observation that since our Lagrangian L is defined as the fixed point set of an
anti-holomorphic involution, we can by complex conjugation complement any curve of
genus g with h boundaries on L to a holomorphic curve of genus 2g + h − 1 with no
                                                                   (g,h)
boundaries. If some given curve contributes to nd                          , the doubled curve would have to
               (2g+h−1,0)
contribute to nd          . We have found that for (g, h) = (0, 2), (1, 1) and (0, 3), these
conditions are sufficient to completely determine the holomorphic ambiguity, and the
rest of the expansion (3.22) is then integral. The holomorphic ambiguities in (3.14)
take the values
                        (0,2)         3           (1,1)         211             (1,1)            9
                   A0           =−       ,      A0        =         ,         A1        =
                                     250                       1250                            5000   (3.23)
                                   (0,3)        1887                (0,3)        3
                                  A0 =                ,            A1 =
                                               312500                          78125
                                                                                   (g,h)
but we refrain from presenting the explicit results for the nd                             .
      We now proceed to the expansion of the topological amplitudes around the other
special points in the moduli space, first the Gepner point, and then the conifold.

3.3     Orbifold expansion

A basis of solutions of the homogeneous Picard-Fuchs equation L̟ = 0 around the
Gepner point ψ = 0 is given by (k = 1, 2, 3, 4)
                                         ∞
                                         X Γ(k/5 + m)5                Γ(k)
                           πkorb = ψ k                                       (5ψ)5m                   (3.24)
                                         m=0
                                                Γ(k/5)5            Γ(k + 5m)

                                                          49
This basis is neither integral nor real, but the relation to the integral basis at large
volume (3.15) is well-understood. We will not need the details here. A particular
solution of the inhomogeneous Picard-Fuchs is
                                ∞
                              4 X Γ(−3/2 − 5m) Γ(1/2)5
                 τ   orb
                           =−                           (5ψ)5(m+1/2)                   (3.25)
                              3 m=0 Γ(−3/2) Γ(1/2 − m)5

   We now come to an important point. In parameterizing the holomorphic ambiguity
(3.14), we have allowed for singularities around the Gepner point, whereas all closed
string amplitudes are regular there. This is due to an important property of open
strings ending on the real quintic that we have already mentioned in the introduction.
Recall that when we start out at large volume, the brane wrapped on the real quintic
has two vacua, corresponding to the choice of a discrete Wilson line. Based on B-model
considerations, it was shown in [23] that those two vacua coalesce as we approach the
point ψ = 0 in Kähler moduli space. The vacuum structure can be described locally
around ψ = 0 by a superpotential [22]
                                               1
                                       W = ψϕ − ϕ3                                     (3.26)
                                               3
where ϕ is the open string field that becomes massless at ψ = 0. This is just as in (2.36)
with n = 2. This behavior should be accompanied by the appearance of a tensionless
domainwall in the BPS spectrum of the 4d theory. Indeed, it was shown in [4] that
after analytic continuation of (3.19), T − τ orb is an integral period. Since τ orb ∼ ψ 5/2
vanishes faster than the two lightest periods π1orb and π2orb , this implies that τ orb indeed
corresponds to a tensionless domainwall. By the same token, one should work with
T̃ = τ orb in (3.8) in order to take the holomorphic limit of the infinitesimal invariant
at ψ = 0.
   Via the connection to 4d physics, the existence of a tensionless domainwall will lead
to singularities in the topological string amplitudes. This is similar to the appearance
of a massless BPS state at the conifold in the closed string story. The singularity
due to a tensionless domainwall is slightly milder in the sense that at least some of the
massless states appear on the string worldsheet. In terms of the tensionless domainwall
τ orb , the leading singularity of the F (g,h) is expected to be

                                     F (g,h) ∼ (τ orb )2−2g−h                          (3.27)

This is precisely the singularity we have allowed in our ansatz for the holomorphic
ambiguity.

                                               50
      To quantify the structure of the F (g,h) around the Gepner point more explicitly, we
use the canonical coordinates and Kähler gauge [18]

                                 π2orb
                            s=         ,          e −K = 5−3/2 π1orb                (3.28)
                                 π1orb

With these definitions, we obtain the following expansions
                      20 3/2     4955 13/2    1007347465 23/2
              T0 = −      s −          s   −              s    +···
                       3        108108       124547601024
                                4955 9/2 1007347465 19/2
            ∆ss = −5s−1/2 −          s −             s   +···
                                3024      1031450112
                    103 −1 34921 4 4345923475 9
          Fs(0,2) =      s +         s +            s +···                          (3.29)
                     50        37800     8122669632
                       67 −3/2 4523 7/2      207513043 17/2
          F (1,1) = −      s    +      s +             s    +···
                      150         7200      1628605440
                      4616 −3/2     457217 7/2 1069164825109 17/2
          F (0,3) = −        s   −         s −                 s   +···
                      9375         1181250       5076668520000
where we have used the values of the holomorphic ambiguity obtained at large volume.

3.4     Conifold expansion

The expansion around the conifold point, ψ = 1, is the hardest because it cannot be
done completely analytically. In the local coordinate x = 5−5 z −1 − 1, the Picard-Fuchs
operator is
                                              1                                 24
Lc = (1+x)L = x(1+x)4 ∂x4 +2(1+x)3 (1+3x)∂x3 + (1+x)2 (23+35x)∂x2 +(1+x)2 ∂x −
                                              5                                625
                                                                            (3.30)
and has as a basis of solutions [18],
                                      2 3
                           π0c = 1 +     x +···
                                     625
                                      3     11
                           π1c = x − x2 + x3 + · · ·
                                     10     75                                      (3.31)
                             c    2   23 3
                           π2 = x − x + · · ·
                                      30
                                            9    169 3
                           π3 = π1 log(x) + x2 −
                             c    c
                                                     x +···
                                           20    450
It is not known analytically what linear combinations of those solutions correspond to
integral (or even real) periods. But the change of basis between (3.31) and the large

                                             51
volume symplectic basis (3.15) can be determined numerically [18], and this knowledge
is sufficient for studying the holomorphic limit at the conifold, both for the closed and
for the open string.
    From the monodromy around the conifold, it at least follows that π1c is an integral
period and that the intersection with the cycle corresponding to π3c /(2πi ) is one. This
is enough to conclude that the Kähler potential has an expansion of the form

                         e −K(x,x̄) = ω0 + x̄ω1 + x̄ log x̄π1c + O(x̄2 )             (3.32)

where ω0 and ω1 are some linear combinations of π0c , π1c and π2c . Thus, the leading
behavior of the metric at x̄ → 0 is a logarithmic divergence
                                              πc 
                       Gxx̄ = ∂x ∂x̄ K = −∂x 1 log x̄ + O(x̄0 )                      (3.33)
                                               ω0
Note that the higher order terms drop out of the Christoffel connection. Thus, taking
the holomorphic limit at the conifold amounts to working with
                                                               π1c
                                     e −K = ω0 ,        tD =                         (3.34)
                                                               ω0
    For the open string, the inhomogeneous Picard-Fuchs equation around the conifold
is, cf., eq. (3.6)
                                              15 −5/2 √
                                    Lc T =         5    1+x                          (3.35)
                                             16π 2
with particular solution τ c given by
                                      1        13        5421
                       4π 2 τ c =     √ x3 −    √ x4 +       √ x5                    (3.36)
                                    80 5     800 5     320000 5
As for the periods, one can determine numerically precisely which solution corresponds
to the analytic continuation of T from (3.19). But to take the holomorphic limit of the
infinitesimal invariant, we better find a solution T˜c which is equivalent to T modulo
real periods such that Cxxx̄ Dx̄ T˜c → 0 as x̄ → 0 (see the discussion around eq. (3.8)).
Because of the singularity in the metric, it is in fact sufficient to have T˜c ∼ x as x → 0.
    At the end, this only leaves one parameter α whose precise value needs to be
determined numerically. We find that the requisite solution is
                                               √
                              α        α         5(3 − 184α) 3
              T˜c = 4π τ + √ π2 = √ x +
                       2 c        c        2
                                                               x +···                (3.37)
                               5        5           1200
with α ≈ −0.002396. Note that despite appearances, (3.37) is not a tensionless do-
mainwall, because we have been working modulo real, not integral periods.

                                                   52
   With all this in hand, we obtain the following expansion of the open topological
string amplitudes around the conifold:

                         (0,2)   3     21 − 1280b1
                       FtD       =−  +             +···
                               250tD      2500
                    √ (1,1)       9     12633 + 56500α
                     5F     =−        +                 +···                      (3.38)
                               1000tD        15000
                    √ (0,3)        3     9423 + 64000α
                     5F     =−         +                +···
                               15625tD       312500
where b1 ≈ 0.1641 is a numerical parameter from [18].

Acknowledgments I owe special thanks to Andrew Neitzke for extensive discussions
and many helpful suggestions. I would also like to thank Simeon Hellerman, Manfred
Herbst, Juan Maldacena, Marcos Mariño, David Morrison, Tony Pantev, Jake Solomon,
Jörg Teschner, and Cumrun Vafa for valuable discussions and communications. I thank
Albrecht Klemm for bringing ref. [49] to my attention. This work was supported in
part by the Roger Dashen Membership at the Institute for Advanced Study and by the
NSF under grant number PHY-0503584.


References

 [1] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Holomorphic anomalies in topolog-
     ical field theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 405, 279 (1993) [arXiv:hep-th/9302103].
 [2] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Kodaira-Spencer theory of gravity
    and exact results for quantum string amplitudes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 165, 311
     (1994) [arXiv:hep-th/9309140].
 [3] P. Candelas, X. C. De La Ossa, P. S. Green and L. Parkes, “A Pair Of Calabi-Yau Man-
     ifolds As An Exactly Soluble Superconformal Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 359, 21 (1991).
 [4] J. Walcher, “Opening Mirror Symmetry on the Quintic,” To appear in Comm. Math.
     Phys. [arXiv:hep-th/0605162]
 [5] R. Pandharipande, J. Solomon and J. Walcher, “Disk enumeration on the Quintic 3-
     fold,” arXiv:math/0610901
 [6] D. R. Morrison and J.            Walcher,   “D-branes   and   Normal    Functions,”
     arXiv:0709.4028 [hep-th].
 [7] W. Lerche, P. Mayr and N. Warner, “Holomorphic N = 1 special geometry of open-
    closed type II strings,” arXiv:hep-th/0207259; “N = 1 special geometry, mixed Hodge
    variations and toric geometry,” arXiv:hep-th/0208039.


                                           53
 [8] I. Antoniadis, K. S. Narain and T. R. Taylor, “Open string topological amplitudes and
     gaugino masses,” Nucl. Phys. B 729, 235 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0507244].
 [9] M. Marino, “Open string amplitudes and large order behavior in topological string
     theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0612127.
[10] B. Eynard, M. Marino and N. Orantin, “Holomorphic anomaly and matrix models,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0702110.
[11] M. Aganagic, R. Dijkgraaf, A. Klemm, M. Marino and C. Vafa, “Topological strings and
     integrable hierarchies,” Commun. Math. Phys. 261, 451 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0312085].
[12] M. Aganagic, A. Neitzke and C. Vafa, “BPS microstates and the open topological string
     wave function,” arXiv:hep-th/0504054.
[13] P. A. Griffiths, “On the periods of certain rational integrals. I, II,” Ann. Math. 90,
     460–541 (1969)
[14] P. A. Griffiths, “Infinitesimal variations of Hodge structure. III. Determinantal varieties
     and the infinitesimal invariant of normal functions,” Compositio Math. 50, no. 2-3,
     267–324 (1983)
[15] C. Voisin, “Une remarque sur l’invariant infinitésimal des fonctions normales,” C. R.
     Acad. Sci. Paris Sr. I Math 307, no. 4, 157–160, (1988)
[16] M. L. Green, “Griffiths’ infinitesimal invariant and the Abel-Jacobi map,” J. Differential
     Geom. 29, no. 3, 545–555 (1989)
[17] S. Yamaguchi and S. T. Yau, “Topological string partition functions as polynomials,”
     JHEP 0407, 047 (2004) [arXiv:hep-th/0406078].
[18] M. x. Huang, A. Klemm and S. Quackenbush, “Topological String Theory on Compact
     Calabi-Yau: Modularity and Boundary Conditions,” arXiv:hep-th/0612125.
[19] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “M-theory and topological strings.                       I,   II,”
     arXiv:hep-th/9809187, arXiv:hep-th/9812127.
[20] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Knot invariants and topological strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 577,
     419 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9912123].
[21] J. M. F. Labastida, M. Marino and C. Vafa, “Knots, links and branes at large N,” JHEP
     0011, 007 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0010102].
[22] I. Brunner, M. R. Douglas, A. E. Lawrence and C. Romelsberger, “D-branes on the
     quintic,” JHEP 0008, 015 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9906200].
[23] K. Hori and J. Walcher, “D-branes from matrix factorizations,” Talk at Strings ’04, June
     28–July 2 2004, Paris. Comptes Rendus Physique 5, 1061 (2004) [arXiv:hep-th/0409204].
[24] W. Lerche, C. Vafa and N. P. Warner, “Chiral Rings in N=2 Superconformal Theories,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 324, 427 (1989).
[25] S. Cecotti and C. Vafa, “Topological antitopological fusion,” Nucl. Phys. B 367 (1991)
     359.


                                              54
[26] K. Hori et al., “Mirror Symmetry,” Clay Mathematics Monographs, Vol. 1, AMS 2003.
[27] H. Ooguri, Y. Oz and Z. Yin, “D-branes on Calabi-Yau spaces and their mirrors,” Nucl.
     Phys. B 477, 407 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9606112].
[28] M. R. Douglas, “D-branes, categories and N = 1 supersymmetry,” J. Math. Phys. 42,
     2818 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0011017].
[29] T. Bridgeland, “Stability conditions on triangulated categories,” arXiv:math/0212237
[30] R. P. Thomas, S.-T. Yau, “Special Lagrangians, stable bundles and mean curvature
     flow,” Comm. Anal. Geom. 10 (2002), no. 5, [arXiv:math/0104197]
[31] M. Herbst, C. I. Lazaroiu and W. Lerche, “Superpotentials, A(infinity) rela-
    tions and WDVV equations for open topological strings,” JHEP 0502, 071 (2005)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0402110].
[32] M. Herbst, “Quantum A-infinity structures for open-closed topological strings,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0602018.
[33] E. R. Sharpe, “D-branes, derived categories, and Grothendieck groups,” Nucl. Phys. B
     561, 433 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9902116].
[34] M. R. Douglas, “D-branes, categories and N = 1 supersymmetry,” J. Math. Phys. 42,
     2818 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0011017].
[35] C. I. Lazaroiu, “D-brane categories,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 18, 5299 (2003)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0305095].
[36] E. Sharpe, “Lectures on D-branes and sheaves,” arXiv:hep-th/0307245.
[37] C. I. Lazaroiu, “String field theory and brane superpotentials,” JHEP 0110, 018 (2001)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0107162].
[38] N. P. Warner, “Supersymmetry in boundary integrable models,” Nucl. Phys. B 450,
     663 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9506064].
[39] M. L. Green, “Infinitesimal methods in Hodge theory,” Algebraic cycles and Hodge
     theory (Torino, 1993), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1594, Springer, 1994, pp. 1–92.
[40] C. Voisin, “Hodge theory and complex algebraic geometry I,II” Cambridge University
     Press, 2002, 2003
[41] E. Witten, “Chern-Simons Gauge Theory As A String Theory,” Prog. Math. 133, 637
     (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9207094].
[42] E. Witten, “Branes And The Dynamics Of QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B 507 658-690 (1997)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9706109]
[43] E. Witten, “New Issues In Manifolds Of SU(3) Holonomy,” Nucl. Phys. B 268, 79 (1986)
[44] S. K. Donaldson and R. P. Thomas, “Gauge theory in higher dimensions,” The geometric
     universe, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1998, pp. 31–47
[45] M. Aganagic and C. Vafa, “Mirror symmetry, D-branes and counting holomorphic discs,”
    arXiv:hep-th/0012041.


                                            55
[46] R. Donagi and E. Markman, “Cubics, integrable systems, and Calabi-Yau threefolds,”
    Proceedings of the Hirzebruch 65 Conference on Algebraic Geometry, Israel Math. Conf.
     Proc., 9, 199–221 (1993) [arXiv:alg-geom/9408004].
[47] H. Clemens, “Cohomology and Obstructions II: Curves on K-trivial threefolds,” with
     contributions by R. Thomas and C. Voisin arXiv:math/0206219
[48] J.-M. Bismut, H. Gillet and C. Soulé “Analytic torsion and holomorphic determinant
    bundles. I,II,III,” Comm. Math. Phys. 115 no. 1, 49–78, no. 1, 79–126, no. 2, 301–351,
     (1988)
[49] I. Biswas and G. Schumacher, “Determinant bundle, Quillen metric, and Petersson-Weil
     form on moduli spaces,” Geom. Funct. Anal. 9, no. 2, 226–255 (1999)
[50] H. Fang and Z. Lu, “Generalized Hodge metrics and BCOV torsion on Calabi-Yau
     moduli,” J. Reine Angew. Math. 588, 49–69 (2005) [arXiv:math/0310007]
[51] J. Walcher, “Evidence for Tadpole Cancellation in the Topological String,”
    arXiv:0712.2775 [hep-th]




                                           56
