                                                                                                hep-th/0405146
                                                                                                HUTP-04/A020, CALT-68-2501




                                      Black Hole Attractors and the Topological String




arXiv:hep-th/0405146v2 1 Jun 2004
                                                      Hirosi Ooguri,a Andrew Strominger,b and Cumrun Vafab

                                                 a
                                                     California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
                                                        b
                                                            Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Harvard University
                                                                     Cambridge, MA 02138, USA




                                                                              Abstract
                                        A simple relationship of the form ZBH = |Ztop |2 is conjectured, where ZBH is a
                                    supersymmetric partition function for a four-dimensional BPS black hole in a Calabi-Yau
                                    compactification of Type II superstring theory and Ztop is a second-quantized topological
                                    string partition function evaluated at the attractor point in moduli space associated to
                                    the black hole charges. Evidence for the conjecture in a perturbation expansion about
                                    large graviphoton charge is given. The microcanonical ensemble of BPS black holes can be
                                    viewed as the Wigner function associated to the wavefunction defined by the topological
                                    string partition function.
                                          Contents
1. Introduction    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1
2. Supergravity    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 5
  2.1. The N = 2, d = 4 area-entropy formula . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 5
  2.2. Higher order corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 7
  2.3. Reinterpretation of the corrected entropy formula     . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 8
3. The topological string    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 10
  3.1. Black hole and topological string partition functions   . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 10
  3.2. A simplified derivation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 12
4. The holographic CFT dual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 14
  4.1. Gauge theory on the D6 brane . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 14
  4.2. Wrapped 5-brane dual      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 15
  4.3. The supersymmetric index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 16
5. Counting of BPS states and topological string . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 17
  5.1. A realization of the D-brane theory for Type IIA superstrings     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 18
6. Ztop as a quantum wave function      . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 21
7. Further Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 25
  7.1. Fragmentation and jumping lines . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 25
  7.2. The holomorphic anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 26
  7.3. Coulomb branches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 26
  7.4. Hypermultiplets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 27




1. Introduction

     Critical string theory compactified on Calabi-Yau spaces has played a central role
in both the mathematical and physical development of modern string theory. The rich
topological data, as well as much of the low energy 4d physics associated with such com-
pactifications, are elegantly summarized by the ĉ = 6 topological strings of A and B types.
These topological string theories have led to a variety of deep physical and mathematical
insights.
     The physical relevance of the data provided by the topological string has been that it
computes F -type terms in the corresponding four dimensional theory [1,2]. These higher-
derivative F -type terms for Type II superstring on a Calabi-Yau are of the general form
                              Z
                                 d4 xd4 θ(Wab W ab )g Fg (X Λ ),                     (1.1)


where Wab is the graviphoton superfield of the N = 2 supergravity and X Λ are the vector
multiplet fields. The lowest component of W is F the graviphoton field strength and the

                                               1
highest one is the Riemann tensor. The lowest components of X Λ are the complex scalars
parameterizing Calabi-Yau moduli and their highest components are the associated U (1)
vector fields. These terms contribute to multiple graviphoton-graviton scattering. (1.1)
includes (after θ integrations) an R2 F 2g−2 term. This fact was used in [3], upon considering
a constant graviphoton background, to provide a precise physical interpretation of the
meaning of A-model topological strings as computing degeneracy of BPS states involving
M2 branes wrapped around 2-cycles of Calabi-Yau upon M-theory compactifications to
five dimensions. Roughly speaking the genus expansion of topological string encodes the
spin of the BPS state and the 2-cycle it wraps corresponds to the charge of the M2 brane.
More precisely the topological string partition function Ztop is the canonical ensemble for
multi-particle spinning five dimensional black holes [4] as was discussed in [5].
      In this paper we define and propose a simple and direct relationship between the
second-quantized topological string partition function Ztop and BPS black hole partition
function ZBH in four dimensions of the form1


                                  ZBH (pΛ , φΛ ) = |Ztop (X Λ )|2 ,                          (1.2)


where X Λ = pΛ + πi φΛ in a certain Kähler gauge. The left hand side here is evalu-
ated as a function of integer magnetic charges pΛ and continuous electric potentials φΛ ,
which are conjugate to integer electric charges qΛ . The right hand side is the holomorphic
square of the partition function for a gas of topological strings on a Calabi-Yau whose
moduli are those associated to the charges/potentials (pΛ , φΛ ) via the attractor equations
[6,7,8,9,10,11] . Both sides of (1.2) are defined in a perturbation expansion in 1/Q, where
Q is the graviphoton charge carried by the black hole.2 The nonperturbative completion of
either side of (1.2) might in principle be defined as the partition function of the holographic
CFT dual to the black hole, as in [12]. We then have the triple equality,


                                    ZCF T = ZBH = |Ztop |2 .                                 (1.3)

  1
      Here and hereafter the partition functions are presumed to contain F 2 (−1)F type insertions,
where F is an appropriate R charge, so that only BPS states contribute.
  2
      The string coupling gs is in a hypermultiplet and decouples from the computation.

                                                 2
This will be discussed herein for two cases: One in which the CFT is a 2d sigma model
arising form the moduli space of wrapped fivebranes [13] compactified on a circle, or the
IR limit of the U (N ) gauge theory on the D6 brane considered in [14].3
      As noted already in [8-10], terms such as (1.1) are nonvanishing in the presence of
a black hole and therefore correct the BPS entropy. It is plausible that, as discussed in
[8-10], due to supersymmetric nonrenormalization theorems, these F -terms are the only
ones which correct the (indexed) BPS entropy. We derive (1.2) building on the super-
gravity analysis of [8-10]. A key new point is that the supergravity partition function
naturally produces a mixed thermodynamic ensemble, in which magnetic charges pΛ are
fixed integers, while electric charges qΛ are summed over weighted by the electric potential
        Λ
as e−φ qΛ . This distinction is irrelevant to the computation of the leading order area-
entropy relation. However it plays a crucial role in disentangling higher order corrections
and achieving the simple relation (1.2).
      The existence of fundamental connection between four-dimensional BPS black holes
and the topological string might have been anticipated from the following observation.
Calabi-Yau spaces have two types of moduli: Kähler and complex structure. The world-
sheet twisting which produces the A (B) model topological string from the critical super-
string eliminates all dependence on the complex structure (Kähler) moduli at the pertur-
bative level. Hence the perturbative topological string depends on only half the moduli.
Black hole entropy on the other hand, insofar as it is an intrinsic property of the black
hole, cannot depend on any externally specified moduli (this statement is corrected by the
anomaly as we discuss in the next paragraph). What happens at leading order is that the
moduli in vector multiplets are driven to attractor values at the horizon which depend only
on the black hole charges and not on their asymptotically specified values. Hypermultiplet
vevs on the other hand are not fixed by an attractor mechanism but simply drop out of
the entropy formula. Consistency suggests this mechanism should extend beyond leading
order, and some evidence for this has been given in [8,9,10]. It is natural to assume this
is valid to all orders in a 1/Q expansion. Hence the perturbative topological string and
the large black hole partition functions depend on only half the Calabi-Yau moduli. It

  3
      This latter realization, even though it has the disadvantage of not being conformal, it has
the advantage of being able to realize arbitrary charge states for the black hole. Having a QFT
is sufficient for computation of (1.3) and the result (being an index) should not depend on taking
the IR limit.

                                                3
would be surprising if string theory produced two functions on the same space that were
not simply related. Indeed we shall argue that they are simply related as in (1.2).
    The fact that the mixed ensemble, rather than microcanonical ensemble, should cor-
respond to topological string is very natural. The very formulation of mixed ensemble
depends on how one splits the charges to electric/magnetic pairs. Indeed topological
string partition function also depends on the choice of how one splits electric and magnetic
charges, as was discussed in [15]. Choice of electric versus magnetic is like a choice of
position versus momentum for topological strings. In fact purely from this perspective
and the commutation relations between electric and magnetic charges and the correspond-
ing chemical potentials one can derive the fact that the imaginary part of the attractor
moduli should be identified with the chemical potentials. Furthermore according to [15]
Ztop behaves as a wave function Ztop ∼ ψ(x) in a given basis and going from electric to
magnetic leads to its Fourier transform ψ̃(p). In this context the formula we are propos-
ing ZBH = |Ztop |2 = |ψ|2 becomes even more suggestive and intriguing: The probability
density of the topological wave function ψ is being related to the number density of black
holes of a fixed magenetic charge and fixed electric chemical potential. More precisely
we can view the black hole microcanonical ensemble as the Wigner function on the elec-
tric/magnetic charge space determined by the topological string wave function. This is
one of the most intriguing consequences of the present paper. Aspects of this relation is
discussed in section 6.
    In the preceding discussion and most of the paper we ignore several important sub-
tleties. It is known that the degeneracy of actual single particle states can jump as we
change the vevs for the scalars in the vector multiplets [16]. One might try to avoid this
by dropping the restriction to single black hole states in ZBH , as we shall ultimately find
appropriate. However this does not avoid the problem because the asymptotic values of
the moduli still enter the index due to the noncompact center-of-mass integrations. Thus
even the perturbative entropy would not be expected to depend just on the charges of
the black hole, but also the background the black hole is embedded in. In fact this is
consistent with another fact for topological strings which reinforces (1.2): the holomorphic
anomaly! It is known that the topological string partition function Ztop does depend on
the background (tB , t∗B ) we expand about, and not just on the chiral vector multiplet X
[17,1]. In (1.2) we identify, via the attractor mechanism, the X with magnetic charge
and electric potential. If we identify (tB , t∗B ) with the background where the black hole
entropy is computed in, then (1.2) is consistent with the fact that both sides do depend on

                                             4
the choice of the background. We thus expect that both sides of (1.2) to depend in addition
on vector and possibly hypermultiplets of the background (the moduli at infinity) where
the black hole is embedded in. Finally we note that the holographic dual partition function
ZCF T is also likely to acquire background dependence via non-compact Coulomb branches.
A partial and inconclusive discussion of these issues appear in section 7. A particualrly
interesting issue is whether or not the partition functions depend on hypermultiplet vevs
at the nonperturbative level via D-brane instantons as in [18,19,20].
    To summarize, we have suppressed some subtle and important issues which are ulti-
mately essential for a complete understanding of the meaning of (1.2). Our hope is that
the naive analysis presented here has suggested the correct exact relation, in which both
sides of (1.2) acquire background dependence. We leave this to future investigations.
    The relation (1.2) states that the supersymmetric partition function of BPS black hole
microstates equals the squared partition function of a second-quantized gas of topological
strings on a Calabi-Yau. Our derivation is mechanical in nature and relies on a detailed
comparison of the perturbation expansion of both quantities. (We propose a streamlined
derivation of this perturbative statement in section 3.3.) However we feel that such a sim-
ple physical relationship should have an equally simple physical derivation which extends
beyond perturbation theory.
    This paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we discuss the supergravity aspects of
F-term corrections. There we motivate the relation ZBH = |Ztop |2 and the interpretation
of ZBH as a mixed ensemble. In section 3 we discuss some normalization issues for relating
this to topological string amplitudes and propose an alternative simple, but non-rigorous
derivation of the main formula ZBH = |Ztop |2 . Section 4 discusses two choices for dual
CFT’s. In Section 5 we discuss the relation between our proposal with the proposed rela-
tionship between topological string amplitudes and crystal melting. Section 6 comments
on the interpretation of Ztop as a quantum amplitude. In section 7 we discuss how the
entropy of black hole as well as the topological string amplitudes do depend in addition on
vector multiplet background (through holomorphic anomaly) and possibly hypermultiplet
background (through non-perturbative corrections).


2. Supergravity

2.1. The N = 2, d = 4 area-entropy formula

    In this subsection, we review the leading semiclassical area-entropy formula for a
general N = 2, d = 4 extremal black hole characterized by magnetic and electric

                                             5
charges (pΛ , qΛ ) derived in [6,7] and recently reviewed in [11].           The asymptotic val-
ues of the moduli in vector multiplets, parameterized by complex projective coordinates
X Λ , Λ = 0, 1, . . . , nV , in the black hole solution are arbitrary. These moduli couple to
the electromagnetic fields and accordingly vary as a function of the radius. At the horizon
they approach an attractor point whose location in the moduli space depends only on the
charges. The locations of these attractor points can be found by looking for supersymmet-
ric solutions with constant moduli. They are determined by the attractor equations,4

                                          pΛ = Re[CX Λ ],                                      (2.1)

                                          qΛ = Re[CF0Λ ],                                      (2.2)

where F0Λ = ∂F0 /∂X Λ are the holomorphic periods, and the subscript 0 distinguishes these
from the string loop corrected periods to appear in the next subsection. Both (pΛ , qΛ ) and
(X Λ , F0Λ ) transform as vectors under the Sp(2n + 2; Z) duality group.
      The (2nv + 2) real equations (2.1) and (2.2) determine the (nv + 2) complex quantities
(C, X Λ ) up to Kähler transformations, which act as

           K → K − f (X) − f¯(X̄),        X Λ → ef X Λ ,     F0 → e2f F0 ,   C → e−f C,        (2.3)

where the Kähler potential K is given by

                                    e−K = i X̄ Λ F0Λ − X Λ F̄0Λ .
                                                               
                                                                                               (2.4)

We could at this point set C = 1 and fix the Kähler gauge but later we shall find other
gauges useful. It is easy to see that - as required - the charges (pΛ , qΛ ) determined by
the attractor equations (2.1), (2.2) are invariant under Kähler transformations. Given
the horizon attractor values of the moduli determined by (2.1) and (2.2) the Bekenstein-
Hawking entropy may be written
                                               1
                                      SBH =      Area = π|Q|2 ,                                (2.5)
                                               4
where Q = Qm + iQe is a complex combination of the magnetic and electric graviphoton
charges and
                                    i                         C C̄ −K
                           |Q|2 =     qΛ C̄ X̄ Λ − pΛ C̄ F̄0Λ =    e .                         (2.6)
                                    2                           4
  4
      As in [13], we have redefined C, X and F by factors of eK/2 relative to [7] so that (X Λ , FΛ )
is a holomorphic section. At the attractor point our variables are related to those of [9] by
  L
CXus        Λ
     = −2iYthem ,      CFΛus (X Λ ) = −2iFΛthem (Y Λ ),    C = −2iZ̄eK/2 .

                                                  6
The normalization of Q here is chosen so that |Q| equals the radius of the two sphere at
the horizon.
      It is useful to rephrase the above results in the context of type IIB superstrings in
terms of geometry of Calabi-Yau. In this case the attractor equations fix the complex
geometry of the Calabi-Yau. The electric/magentic charges correlate with three cycles of
Calabi-Yau. Choosing a symplectic basis for the three cycles gives a choice of the splitting
to electric and magnetic charges. Let AΛ denote a basis for the electric three cycles, B Σ
the dual basis for the magnetic charges and Ω the holomorphic 3-form at the attractor
point. Ω is fixed up to an overall multiplication by a complex number Ω → λΩ. There is
a unique choice of λ such that the resulting Ω has the property that
                        Z                                    Z
                   Λ                          Λ
                  p =         ReΩ = Re[CX ]           qΛ =          ReΩ = Re[CF0Λ ]         (2.7)
                         AΛ                                    BΛ


where ReΩ = 12 (Ω + Ω). In terms of this choice the black hole entropy can be written as

                                            π
                                                  Z
                                      SBH =                Ω∧Ω                              (2.8)
                                            4         CY

2.2. Higher order corrections

      In this subsection we review some results of [8,9,10,21], in which higher derivative
corrections, suppressed at large charges, to the entropy5 formula (2.5) are derived from
the F -term corrections to the supergravity action using Wald’s method [22]. (For a com-
prehensive review of the results of these papers and related subjects, see [23].) All other
corrections to the action involve hypermultiplets. Hypermultiplet vevs are not fixed at the
horizon and can be varied continuously. If the entropy depended on hypermultiplet vevs,
it could not be an intrinsic property of the black hole and the number of microstates for
fixed charges could not be an integer. Hence we expect the vector multiplet F -terms to
encode all corrections to the entropy.
      F -term corrections to the action are encoded in a string loop corrected holomorphic
prepotential
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                     Λ    2
                                F (X , W ) =            Fh (X Λ )W 2h ,                     (2.9)
                                                  h=0

  5
      The term entropy in [8,9,10,21] and here more precisely should refer to an indexed quantity
protected from some types of corrections by supersymmetry. This is discussed in section 4.3 below.

                                                  7
where Fh can be computed by topological string amplitudes (as we review in the next
section) and W 2 involves the square of the anti-self dual graviphoton field strength. This
obeys the homogeneity equation

                  X Λ ∂Λ F (X Λ , W 2 ) + W ∂W F (X Λ , W 2 ) = 2F (X Λ , W 2 ).       (2.10)

Near the black hole horizon, the attractor value of W 2 obeys

                                         C 2 W 2 = 256.                                (2.11)

The exact attractor equations are then simply

                                        pΛ = Re[CX Λ ],                                (2.12)
                                                 
                                             Λ 256
                                qΛ = Re CFΛ X , 2     .                                (2.13)
                                               C
This is essentially the only possibility consistent with symplectic invariance. It is then
argued in [8,9,10,21] that the entropy as a function of the charges is

                               πi                            π
                      SBH =       (qΛ C̄ X̄ Λ − pΛ C̄ F̄Λ ) + Im[C 3 ∂C F ],           (2.14)
                               2                             2

where FΛ , X Λ and C are expressed in terms of the charges using (2.12) and (2.13).

2.3. Reinterpretation of the corrected entropy formula

    In this subsection we reinterpret the F -term corrected entropy formula (2.14), and
thereby cast it in a significantly simpler form.
    Let us introduce φΛ as the imaginary parts of CX Λ and write

                                                      i Λ
                                      CX Λ = pΛ +       φ ,                            (2.15)
                                                      π

where we applied the first half of the attractor equations (2.12) for the real parts of CX Λ .
Defining a function F of (φ, p) by
                                                        
                                                  2   256 Λ
                          F (φ, p) = −π Im C F X , 2
                                                      C
                                   = −πIm F CX Λ , 256
                                                      
                                                                                       (2.16)
                                                          
                                              Λ    i Λ
                                   = −πIm F p + φ , 256 ,
                                                   π

                                                  8
the second half of the attractor equations (2.13) can be written as

                                                           ∂
                           qΛ = 12 (CFΛ + C̄ F̄Λ ) = −        F (φ, p),                (2.17)
                                                          ∂φΛ
where
                                 ∂      i  ∂      i     ∂
                                   Λ
                                     =       Λ
                                               −             .                         (2.18)
                                ∂φ     πC ∂X     π C̄ ∂ X̄ Λ
    Using the homogeneity relation,
                                       
                                  Λ 256    ∂
                       C∂C F X , 2 = X Λ       F − 2F,                                 (2.19)
                                    C     ∂X Λ

and the attractor equations (2.17), the fully corrected entropy formula (2.14) is brought
into the simple form
                                                           ∂
                           SBH (q, p) = F (φ, p) − φΛ         F (φ, p).                (2.20)
                                                          ∂φΛ
Here q in the left-hand side and φ in the right-hand side are related by (2.17). We recognize
that (2.20) combined with (2.17) is the Legendre transformation from SBH (qΛ , pΛ ) to
F (φΛ , pΛ ) and that φΛ are chemical (electric) potentials for qΛ .
    In order to interpret (2.20) we note that in the usual formulation of a path integral,
magnetic-type charges are associated to a choice of vector bundle and are not summed
over. On the other hand electric-type charges are typically not fixed. Instead one chooses
a boundary condition on the electric potential, which gives a weighted sum over electric
charges. Hence the usual thermal path integral should be interpreted as a microcanonical
ensemble of magnetic charges pΛ and a canonical ensemble for electric charges qΛ with
potentials φΛ . Such a “mixed” partition function can be written
                                               X                  Λ
                            ZBH (φΛ , pΛ ) =        Ω(pΛ , qΛ )e−φ qΛ ,                (2.21)
                                               qΛ


where Ω(pΛ , qΛ ) are integer black hole degeneracies and ln Ω(pΛ , qΛ ) is the microcanonical
entropy.
    Hence we see that F (φΛ , pΛ ) defined by (2.16) is simply related to the mixed partition
function ZBH as
                              ZBH (φΛ , pΛ ) = exp F (φΛ , pΛ ) ,
                                                              
                                                                                       (2.22)

and that SBH (qΛ , pΛ ) computed in [8,9,10,21] based on a spacetime path integral picture
is the mixed canonical/microcanonical entropy given by the Legendre transform F as in
(2.20). We note that, according to our proposal, the microcanonical entropy ln Ω(qΛ , pΛ )

                                                9
is not equal the mixed entropy SBH (qL , pΛ ) since the Legendre transformation is not the
inverse of the Laplace transformation (2.21), except in the limit of large electric charges
|q Λ | ≫ 1, where the latter can be approximated by the former in the steepest descent
method.
      It is instructive to rewrite ZBH in terms of the complex graviphoton charge Q =
Qm + iQe ,6 which is given as a function of φΛ and pΛ by

                                   pΛ                   φΛ
                          Q2 = i      (CFΛ − C̄ F̄Λ ) +    (CFΛ + C̄ F̄Λ ).                     (2.23)
                                    4                   4π

Choosing a gauge in which

                                                                    64
                                 K = 0,       C = 2Q,        W2 =                               (2.24)
                                                                    Q2

at the attractor point, we find from (2.6) that

                                                          pΛ + iφΛ /π
                                 C = 2Q,           XΛ =               ,                         (2.25)
                                                              2Q

and                                         "          Λ           2h #
                                             X         p + iφΛ /π    8
                    ln ZBH = −4πQ2 Im              Fh                       .                   (2.26)
                                                          2Q         Q
                                               h



3. The topological string

3.1. Black hole and topological string partition functions

      The notion of topological string was introduced in [24]. Subsequently a connection
between them and superstring was discovered: It was shown in [1,2], that the superstring
loop corrected F -terms (2.9) can be computed as topological string amplitudes. The
purpose of this subsection is to translate the supergravity notation of the previous section
to the topological string notation.
      The second quantized partition function for the topological string may be written

                               Ztop (tA , gtop ) = exp Ftop (tA , gtop ) ,
                                                                       
                                                                                                 (3.1)

  6
      This is a slight abuse of terminology, as Q is not precisely a charge. Rather it is a combination
of charges and potentials.

                                                    10
where
                                                   X
                                                             2h−2
                             Ftop (tA , gtop ) =            gtop  Ftop,h (tA ),         (3.2)
                                                       h

and Ftop,h is the h-loop topological string amplitude. The Kähler moduli are expressed in
the flat coordinates
                                              XA
                                      tA =      0
                                                  = θ A + ir A ,                        (3.3)
                                              X
where r A are the Kähler classes of the Calabi-Yau M and θ A are periodic θ A ∼ θ A + 1.
     We would like to determine relations between supergravity quantities and topological
string quantities. Using the homogeneity property (2.10) and the expansion (2.9), the
holomorphic prepotential in supergravity can be expressed as

                                                                   XΛ
                                                                                   
                                 Λ                     0 2               256
                         F (CX , 256) = (CX ) F                       ,
                                                                   X 0 (CX 0 )2
                                              ∞
                                              X                                         (3.4)
                                                             0 2−2h             A
                                          =        (CX )               fh (t ),
                                              h=0


where fh (tA ) is related to Fh (X Λ ) in (2.9) as

                                                                   XΛ
                                                                       
                                        A              2h
                                     fh (t ) = 16 Fh                        .           (3.5)
                                                                   X0

This suggests an identification of the form fh (tA ) ∼ Ftop,h (tA ) and gtop ∼ (CX 0 )−1 .
For later purposes, we need precise relations between supergravity and topological string
quantities including numerical coefficients. These can be determined by studying the limit
of a large Calabi-Yau space.
     In the supergravity notation, the genus 0 and 1 terms in the large volume are given
by [9]
                                             X AX B X C    1     XA
                   F CX Λ , 256 = C 2 DABC
                               
                                                         −   c2A    +···
                                                X0         6     X0                     (3.6)
                                                            1
                                 = (CX 0 )2 DABC tA tB tC − c2A tA + · · · ,
                                                            6
where                                              Z
                                        c2A =              c2 ∧ αA ,                    (3.7)
                                                    M

with c2 being the second Chern class of M , and CABC = −6DABC are the four-cycle
intersection numbers. These terms are normalized so that the mixed entropy SBH is given

                                                       11
by (2.14). On the other hand, the topological string amplitude in this limit is given by
[17,1]7
                                    (2π)3 i                πi
                         Ftop = −     2     DABC tA tB tC − c2A tA + · · · ,                    (3.8)
                                     gtop                  12
The normalization here is fixed by the holomorphic anomaly equations in [1], which are
nonlinear equations for Ftop,h . The same normalization of Ftop is also used in the M theory
interpretation [3] and in the quantum foam interpretaion [25].
       Comparing the one-loop terms in (3.6) and (3.8), which are independent of gtop , we
find
                                                         2i
                                F (CX Λ , 256) = −          Ftop (tA , gtop ).                  (3.9)
                                                         π
Given this, we can compare the genus 0 terms to find
                                                         4πi
                                            gtop = ±          .                                (3.10)
                                                         CX 0
This implies
                         ln ZBH = −π Im F (CX Λ , 256) = Ftop + F̄top .
                                                     
                                                                                               (3.11)

and
                                  ZBH (φΛ , pΛ ) = |Ztop (tA , gtop )|2 ,                      (3.12)

with
                                    pA + iφA /π              4πi
                             tA =    0     0
                                                , gtop = ± 0         .
                                    p + iφ /π             p + iφ0 /π
Such a simple relation between ZBH and Ztop calls for an explanation. The remainder of
this paper is devoted to physical interpretation of this relation.

3.2. A simplified derivation?

       In this section we propose a simpler supergravity derivation of the relation

                                            ZBH = |Ztop |2 .                                   (3.13)

With the exception of one assumption, which we cannot a priori justify, the proposed
derivation may clarify the origin of such a relation. However we will not carefully work
out the details and we omit the factors of 2 and π in this section.
  7
       In [1] it was found that consistency requires that an additional factor of 1/2 be multiplied to
the one-loop amplitude Ftop,1 defined in [17]. The factor 1/2 comes from the Z2 automorphism
of the worldsheet torus.

                                                    12
    One main ingredient in this derivation is the observation of [26] that the N = 2
supergravity coupled to vector multiplets can be written as

                                                            √
                  Z                                       Z
              S = d xd θ (supervolume form) + h.c. = d4 x −gR + ...
                      4  4
                                                                                           (3.14)

where the supervolume form in the above depends non-trivially on curvature of the fields.
This reproduces the ordinary action after integrating over d4 θ and picking up the θ 4 term
in the supervolume. In the context of black holes the boundary terms accompanying (3.14)
give the classical black hole entropy.
    We now come to the derivation of (3.13). As was observed in [1,2] topological string
computes the terms
                                 ∞ Z
                                 X
                           F =              d4 xd4 θFh (X)(W 2 )g + c.c.                   (3.15)
                                 h=0

There are various terms one can get from the above action after integrating over d4 θ. Let
us concentrate on one of the terms which turns out to be the relevant one for us: Take the
top components of X Λ and W 2 , and absorb the d4 θ integral from the supervolume measure
as in (3.14). We will work in the gauge X 0 ∼ 1 and thus C ∼ 1/gtop . As noted before in
the near-horizon black hole geometry in this gauge the top component W 2 ∼ 1/C 2 ∼ gtop
                                                                                    2

and the X Λ are fixed by the attractor mechanism. We thus have the black hole free energy
                                 ∞
                                 X                               Z
                                        2h
                     ln ZBH =          gtop Ftop,h (X Λ /X 0 )       d4 xd4 θ + c.c.
                                 h=0
                                 X∞
                             =         (gtop )2h−2 Ftop,h (X Λ /X 0 ) + c.c.
                                 g=0

                             = 2 Re Ftop ,

                                            d4 xd4 θ ∼ 1/gtop
                                                          2
                                        R
where we have used the fact that                              . Upon exponentiation this leads to
(3.13).
    Here we have shown that if we consider one absorption of θ 4 term in (3.15) upon
d4 θ integral we get the desired result. That there be no other terms is not obvious. For
example another way to absorb the θ’s would have given the familiar term R2 F 2g−2 where
F is the graviphoton field. However, as has been observed in [8,9,10] such terms do not
contribute in the black hole background. It would be nice to find a simple way to argue
why these terms do not contribute and that we are left with this simple absorption of the
θ integrals.

                                                   13
4. The holographic CFT dual

    The near-horizon geometry of a four-dimensional BPS black hole is the Robinson-
Bertotti universe AdS2 ×S2 .    On general grounds one expects a holographically dual
conformally-invariant quantum mechanics CFT1 , but such AdS/CFT dualities are not
yet well-understand for the general case. In the special case p0 = 0 a CFT2 dual is known
[13], where the black hole geometry is expected to arise upon considering a specific circle
compactification (i.e. a quotient of AdS3 geometry [27]). These cases are discussed in sec-
tion 4.2. However to obtain the most general allowed black hole charges we could consider
more general realization of the branes. In the context of type IIA superstring this can be
achieved by considering the gauge theory on D6 branes wrapped on Calabi-Yau, which is a
particular topolgoically twisted gauge theory studied in [14], which will be briefly reviewed
in section 4.1. Since the main interest of this paper focuses on index computations the
details of the CFT are not essential. The index computation can be done for the QFT even
before flowing to the IR. The basic idea is that the dual QFT should involve the gauge
theory living on the brane which leads to the black hole. Suppose the D brane in question
has d + 1 dimensional worldvolume. Then we write the QFT as a theory on V d × S 1 and
the IR limit of this theory should lead to a dual CFT1 on S 1 (we view R1 as the infinite
radius limit of S 1 ). In such cases we would be referring to a (d + 1) dimensional QFT as
the dual theory and sometimes we loosely call it the “CFT dual”.
    For the purposes of our mixed ensemble we would like to realize the theory on the
brane to be such that the electric charges can be induced as excitations in the corresponding
QFT. Below we will present two examples of such a theory.

4.1. Gauge theory on the D6 brane

    Consider type IIA theory compactified on the Calabi-Yau M . We consider the D6
and D4 branes wrapped over cycles of Calabi-Yau as magnetic charged states and D0
and D2 branes as electrically charaged states. More specifically we wrap N D6 branes
on the Calabi-Yau M and we get a U (N ) gauge theory on M × S 1 . This gauge theory
is a topologically twisted version of the maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory on
Calabi-Yau (see [14] for details). Moreover the lower brane charges can be viewed as
gauge excitations on the D6 brane, as is well known. Thus we end up with a maximally
supersymmetric gauge theory in 7 dimensions on M × S 1 . Fixing the D6 and D4 brane
charges as pA , we will denote this theory by T (M, pA ). Here p0 = N .

                                             14
     As we will discuss below we will be interested in the limit where the radius of S 1 ,
β → 0. In this limit the gauge theory simplifies by T-duality on the circle to a gauge
thoery on N D5 branes wrapping M . Precisely this theory was studied in [14] in finding
a dual description of the topological string. We will discuss how this case is related to a
special case of our conjecture in section 5.

4.2. Wrapped 5-brane dual

     For the other holographic dual we set one of the magnetic charges p0 = 0. In this case
the holographic duality can be simply understood in one higher dimension. Briefly, (see
[13] for details ) it is a compactification of the AdS3 /CFT2 duality associated to the black
string obtained by wrapping fivebranes on a four-cycle in the class pA of a Calabi-Yau
compactification of M theory. Membrane charge corresponds to turning on the self-dual
three form flux on the 2-cycle qA in the fivebrane. 0-brane charge is obtained on further
compactification to IIA by adding momentum to the black string wrapping the M-theory
circle.
     The resulting dual CFT, which we will denote T (M, pA ) can be briefly described as
follows [13]. The four-cycle is dual to an element P of H 2 (M, Z), where M denotes the
Calabi-Yau and we assume P corresponds to a very ample divisor. Then the moduli space
MP has dimension
                                  1
                                      Z
                                              2P 3 + P c2 (M ) − 2.
                                                              
                             dP =                                                       (4.1)
                                  6       M

The theory T (M, pA ) contains dP bosons with target space MP . There are also 3 more
nonchiral bosons from translation in R3 . In addition reduction of the self-dual three-form
living on the fivebrane gives chiral bosons. The number of such left-moving bosons is

                                     1
                                       Z
                                           4P 3 + 5P c2 (M ) − 1,
                            −
                                                            
                           b2 (P ) =                                                 (4.2)
                                     6 M

while the number of right movers is

                                      1
                                          Z
                            b+                 2P 3 + P c2 (M ) − 1.
                                                               
                             2 (P ) =                                                   (4.3)
                                      6   M


These massless scalars live on the signature (b+    −                        2
                                               2 , b2 ) Narain lattice ΓP = H (P, Z).
Membrane charges qA correspond to momenta in the signature (1, b2 (M ) − 1) sublattice
ΓM = H 2 (M, Z) of ΓP . Hence we can regard qA as an operator constructed from the
chiral scalars in T (M, pA ), while 0-brane charge is simply q0 = L0 .

                                                 15
    The theory T (M, pA ) has (0, 4) supersymmetry, and accordingly the number of right
moving fermions is
                                    1
                                         Z
                              NRF =              2P 3 + P c2 (M ) .
                                                                 
                                                                                       (4.4)
                                     3       M

Assuming b1 (M ) = 0 there are no left moving fermions.
    We note that a priori T (M, pA ) depends on all the moduli of M (as well as the
integer magnetic charges pA ) through the moduli-dependence of MP . The electric charges
(q0 , qA ) arise as momentum operators in the theory associated the chiral scalars spanning
the Narain lattice ΓP .

4.3. The supersymmetric index

    The holographic duals we have described above both contain the center of mass degree
of freedom. In comparison with the AdS2 ×S2 geometry it is natural to mod out the center
of mass degree of freedom. This gets rid of an infinite volume factor as well as fermionic
zero modes associated with the center of mass degree of freedom. We then define the
supersymmetric index for this theory by


                   ZCF T (pA , φΛ ; β, M ) = Tr′ (−)F exp(−βH − φΛ qΛ ) .
                                                                      
                                                                                       (4.5)
                                               3
    In the wrapped fivebrane description F = 2JR . Naively one might think that ZCF T ,
being an index, is invariant under all smooth deformations of T , in particular variations
of the complex structure and Kähler moduli of M , and also independent of the inverse
temperature β. In fact this is not obviously the case for the following reason. Consider for
example the contributions with qΛ = 0. For the wrapped 5-brane dual, the moduli space
MP of the four cycle P has points at which the single four cycle degenerates into two
four-cycles. These points are junctions with Coulomb branches at which the four cycle can
fragment into two four-cycles which move apart in the R3 . For the U (N ) gauge theory on
D6 brane the same phenomenon happens where there are points where U (N ) → U (K) ×
U (N − k). Thus in either case the holographic dual theory develops a new noncompact
direction and a new continuum in the spectrum.
    It is well-known that the number of BPS states can jump in such a case; for example,
it was observed in the case of N = 2 gauge theories in four dimensions in [16], and it
is realized in the Calabi-Yau context in [28]. When this happens via the emergence of
a noncompact direction, it is expected that an index becomes a continuous function of
background moduli. This is shown explicitly in two-dimensional models [29], where the

                                                 16
index Tr(−1)F F e−βH defined for Landau-Ginzburg theories turns out to be a continuous
function of moduli as it receives anomalous contribution from multiparticle states, even
though the number of BPS states jumps in this case.
      This fragmentation phenomenon is generic [30] and occurs at many values of the
charges.8 We thus expect that ZCF T acquires anomalous dependence on the moduli of M .
We will discuss this issue in more detail in secton 7. The index (4.5) can also depend on
the inverse temperature β, as we will discuss in the next section. We will argue that the
mixed partition function of black holes discussed in this paper is identified with the β → 0
limit of the index.


5. Counting of BPS states and topological string

      The aim of this section is to consider some possible checks for the conjecture ZBH =
|Ztop |2 , by using the microscopic description of the black hole entropy.
      Given that ZBH is expressed in terms of the topological string partition function as
|Ztop |2 , it is natural to expect that we are computing an index, i.e., the number of black
hole microstates of a given set of charges where we count each BPS multiplet with a ±
sign correlated with whether the lowest component is a boson or a fermion. An obvious
candidate would be the index (4.5) discussed in the last section.
      Due to the presence of noncompact directions, the index (4.5) may depend on β.
Thus, we should ask what is the natural value for β from the perspective of the black hole
entropy. We propose that for the four-dimensional black hole under study, we should take
the trace over all states of a given charge with some electric potential, regardless of their
energy. In other words we should take the limit β → 0. According to what we have found
in this paper, we would then identify

                        lim Z(p, φ; β, M ) = ZBH = |Ztop (gtop , t; M )|2,                  (5.1)
                        β→0

where
                                             1       A   XA
                                   gtop ∼        , t   ∼    ,
                                            CX 0         X0
with X’s are fixed by the attractor mechanism as

                                                       φA
                                        X A ∼ pA + i      .
                                                        π
  8
      A closely related phenomenon of multiple basins of attraction was pointed out in [31,32,33].

                                                17
    Recently it was shown that the topological string partition function Ztop for a toric
Calabi-Yau manifold is expressed in the following form [25,14],
                                    X
                           Ztop =       Ω(q) exp(−gtop q0 − tA qA ),
                                    q


where Ω(q) is an integer given by the number of configuration of a classical statistical model.
We will find that, when pΛ = 0, the limit of the black hole entropy limβ→0 ZBH (p, φ; β, M )
can also be brought into this form via a chain of duality transformations of Type II string
theory. More precisely we argue that the inclusion of the anti-holomorphic contributions
to the gauge theory description of [14] leads to |Ztop |2 instead of Ztop . More precisely we
argue that the QFT dual of our black hole in the β → 0 and by a combination of T and S
duality gets mapped to the same QFT as discussed in [14] where the transformed chemical
potentials take the values given above. Thus the crystal melting ensemble is the S-dual of
the mixed black hole ensemble.

5.1. A realization of the D-brane theory for Type IIA superstrings

    Consider Type IIA superstring compactified on a Calabi-Yau threefold. In order to
formulate the partition function (4.5) in the superstring context, we take a Euclidean
time and compactify it on a circle of radius β with periodic (supersymmetry preserving)
boundary conditions for the fermions. We consider a system of D6 and D4 branes carrying
magnetic charges p0 and pA , and regard D0 and D2 branes as electric excitations. The
theory on the branes is a gauge theory, which is topologically twisted [34] to give the right
amount of supersymmetry. Gauge theories of this type have been discussed in [35,36]. We
will consider the case with pΛ = 0 since this will simplify some of the analysis below. In
this context we should view the gauge theory as U (N |N ) where the lower brane charges
are induced as excitations of this gauge theory.
    The index (4.5) can be computed either as a trace over the QFT Hilbert space (with
the center-of-mass degrees of freedom removed in the case of (4.5)) or by periodically
identifying the imaginary time of Euclideanized AdS2 with period β. From the latter
point of view, the index is given by a sum over BPS states in AdS2 . If the type IIA string
coupling gA is small, dominant contributions would come from D0 and D2 branes carrying
electric charges q0 and qA in the form,
                                                 
                                         β  β A
                                exp − q0 −    t qA ,                                      (5.2)
                                        gA gA

                                               18
where tA is the Kähler class measured in the type IIA string frame.
    Let us consider the limit β → 0, where we expect the identification (5.1) works. In
order for the D0 and D2 branes to give finite contributions, we also take gA → 0 keeping
the ratio β/gA ≪ 1. Comparing this with the corresponding contribution in (4.5) from
states with charges q0 , qA , we can identify the type IIA variables gA , tA with the chemical
potentials φ0 , φA as
                                            β         β A
                                    φ0 =      , φA =    t .                              (5.3)
                                           gA        gA
The contribution of the D0 branes also suggests the identification of the type IIA string
coupling with the topological string coupling as

                                                       gA
                                           gtop ∼         .                              (5.4)
                                                       β

    Note that this gives an alternative derivation of the attractor mechanism. As we have
shown in section 3, X 0 , X A are related to topological string parameters as

                                            1                  tA
                                  X0 ∼            , XA ∼           .                     (5.5)
                                           gtop               gtop

Assuming (5.4), we arrive at the relation,

                                            1          β
                                 X0 ∼             ∼       = φ0 ,
                                           gtop        gA
                                            tA    β A
                                 XA ∼           ∼    t = φA .
                                           gtop   gA

This reproduces the attractor values (2.15) of the moduli.
    Note however, that in the limit of small β it is natural to do a T -duality. Taking T
dual around the imaginary time direction gives Type IIB theory on a circle of radius 1/β
and with string coupling gB = gA /β. As already mentioned we are interested in the limit
β/gA ≪ 1 which implies that gB ≫ 1. Thus to get a better description of this type IIB
theory we need to do an S-duality. After S duality gB → 1/gB . Note that under S-duality
tI /gB → tI . By doing this S-duality the amplitudes of topological (A-model) string get
related to amplitudes of D(-1) and D1 brane instantons in the CY. This is related to the
fact that topological string partition function has an expansion of the form
                                    X
                           Ztop =        Ω(q) exp(−gtop q0 − tA qA ),                    (5.6)
                                     q


                                                  19
where in the latter q0 and qA can be interpreted as the D-instanton and D1-brane contri-
bution in the type IIB theory. This result for topological string was recently derived in
[25,14], for toric Calabi-Yau manifolds, where it was shown that Ω(q) counts a number of
configurations in a classical statistical model describing melting of a crystal. More pre-
cisely Ω(q) is related to the partition function of the theory on a D5 brane wrapping the
Calabi-Yau with fixed induced D0 and D2 brane charge–exactly the same theory which
we have discussed as a holographic dual to the black hole. Moreover it was conjectured
in [14] and in [37] that this relation is true for general compact Calabi-Yau as well. We
thus find that Ω(q) is related to the number of BPS states of the black hole with p = 0.
This relation between states of the topologically twisted theory on the brane and the topo-
logical string partition function has been recently explained in [20] by using S-duality of
Type IIB superstrings, which is T-dual to the S-duality we have used here.9 The relation
(5.6) is similar the relation we are anticipating from our general analysis applied to this
special case. Namely the right hand side of (5.6) is similar to what we have called ZBH for
this holographic dual. However there are two important differences: This equation relates
Zcrystal = Ztop instead of ZBH = |Ztop |2 . We believe this may be due to the fact that
in the analysis of [14] one was specifically considering holomorphic moduli dependence of
the holographic dual Yang-Mills theory on Calabi-Yau. But there is a more fundamental
difference between the two ensembles: The black hole ensemble and the crystal melting
ensemble are S-dual of one another (i.e., we have a strong/weak duality on the topological
string coupling constant) and so there is no one to one map from a melting crystal config-
uration to that of a black hole. Nevertheless, it would be important to study this relation
further.
      Note that the connection between topopological strings and topologically twisted
Yang-Mills theory we have proposed is analogous to that of N = 2 topological Yang-
Mills theory in 2 dimensions. In that case it is known that N = 2 topological Yang-Mills
theory is equivalent to ordinary non-supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory [39]. Moreover the
ordinary Yang-Mills theory has been studied in the limit of large rank [40,41,42], which is
analogous to our semiclassical expansion of black holes, and it has been seen that it can
be written as a square of a topological theory, which maps worldsheet Riemann surfaces
holomorphically to the target 2d space where the Yang-Mills lives on. They find for the
2D Yang-Mills case
                                           ZY M = |Ztop |2 ,
  9
      See [38] for discussion of a related issue from a different point of view.

                                                  20
very much in the spirit of what we are predicting for the higher dimensional topologically
twisted version of YM on CY.
    Let us now turn to the other limit β → ∞. In this case, only ground states can
contribute to (4.5). In order for D0 and D2 branes contribute appreciably, as is evident
from (4.5), we need to take gA → ∞ so that gA /β stays finite. Thus, it is natural that the
limβ→∞ Z is related to a 5d black hole computation in M theory on the Calabi-Yau space
times a circle. This is in fact the duality explored in [3] where M2 brane degeneracies
was connected to topological A-model strings. More precisely in this five-dimensional
context one identifies the tA chemical potential, as the chemical potential for the M 2
brane, and the gtop with the chemical potential for the J3 generator in SU (2)L subgroup
of the SU (2)L × SU (2)R = SO(4) spatial rotation group in five dimensions.
    It is natural also to ask what does the β dependence of Z mean for the black hole
entropy. It is morally a black hole in the background of “supersymmetric temperature β1 ”
(due to periodic fermionic boundary conditions).



6. Ztop as a quantum wave function

    The relation ZBH = |Ztop |2 suggests that Ztop should be interpreted as a quantum
state and ZBH the corresponding probability amplitude. Roughly speaking, Ztop is the
quantum amplitude for finding a black hole with charges (pΛ , qΛ ) = (Re CX Λ , Re CFΛ ).
    This fits nicely with the discussion in [15], where it was observed that the holomorphic
anomaly of [1] can be interpreted in a simple way if one identifies Ztop as a state in an
“auxiliary” Hilbert space arising from geometric quantization of the moduli space MM of
the Calabi-Yau M as a phase space: In the B-model context we define
                                  Z                 Z
                              Λ
                          CX =         Ω,    CFΛ =      Ω
                                       AΛ                     BΛ


where AΛ , B Σ are symplectic conjugate 3-cycles and assign a commutation relation which
in our normalizations is given by

                                                      2i Λ
                                    [CX Λ , CFΣ ] =     δ ,                            (6.1)
                                                      π Σ

or equivalently
                                                     2i Λ
                                    [X Λ , FΣ ] =       δ .
                                                    πC 2 Σ
                                              21
The topological string amplitudes depend only on half of these variables, which we take to
by X Λ . The choice of the background Calabi-Yau M0 which one expands about changes
what one means by Ω and thus how one writes the Ztop (X Λ ). This dependence on M0
was proposed in [15] to be equivalent to the holomorphic anomaly equation of [1]. This
relation has been further elucidated recently in [43]. Note that Ztop not only depends on
the background (whose black hole interpretation we will discuss in the next section) but it
also depends on the choice of a symplectic basis of 3-cycles (i.e. the separation of 3-cycles
into the A and B cycles). In this section we would like to explore, for a fixed background
M0 the dependence of Ztop on the choice of the symplectic basis.
       Note that (6.1) is compatible with the semiclassical statement that FΣ = ∂Σ F0 (X Λ ).
To see this recall that in our normalization we have
                                                          
                               Ftop         πi 2       256
                              e     = exp     C F X, 2
                                            2          C
                                                             
                                            πi 2
                                    = exp     C F0 (X) + · · · ,
                                            2

Note that 1/C plays the role of the topological string coupling constant gtop . Thus, rep-
resenting
                                                 2   ∂
                                      FΣ = −i
                                                πC ∂X Σ
                                                   2

acting on the topological string wave function and taking the semi-classical limit C → ∞
(i.e., gtop → 0), we recover the classical relation FΣ = ∂Σ F0 (X Λ ).
       In our context we also have to deal with the anti-topological sector. The same analysis
goes through. To keeps the sign conventions compatible with our previous discussion note
that                                      h π                      i
                                                         Λ
                              eF top = exp −i C̄ 2 F 0 (X ) + · · ·
                                             2
which is compatible with the commutation relation
                                        Λ              2i Λ
                                     [X , F Σ ] = −         δ                            (6.2)
                                                      π C̄ 2 Σ
Moreover the topological and anti-topological amplitudes are independent of one another,
which implies that all the barred variables commute with all the unbarred variables.
       How are these commutation relations compatible with our black hole interpretation?
To see this recall
                                        pΛ = Re CX Λ
                                                    

                                        qΛ = Re [CFΛ ] .

                                               22
Using the above commutation relations we learn that, as expected the electric and magnetic
charges do commute:
                                         [pΛ , qΣ ] = 0.

This is expected because we can measure both at the same time. However, we can learn
something new from these commutation relations: So far we have talked about electric
chemical potentials φΛ . We could also define magnetic chemical potentials χΛ . Note that
because of their definition one expects these to be conjugate to the corresponding charges
(this is true if we replace sum over charges by integrals which is true to all order in string
expansion)
                               [φΛ , qΣ ] = δΣ
                                             Λ
                                                      [χΣ , pΛ ] = δΣ
                                                                    Λ


                                [φΛ , pΣ ] = 0        [χΣ , qΛ ] = 0

For these to be compatible with the above commutation relation we are led to the unique
choice
                                                 i Λ
                                      CX Λ = pΛ +  φ
                                                 π
                                                i
                                      CFΛ = qL + χΛ ,
                                                π
which is exactly the relations we had obtained before. We thus see that the structure of
topological string anticipates the identification of chemical potential with the imaginary
parts of the periods.
    Now we come to another issue which is the dependence of Ztop on the choice of the
symplectic basis. The fact that Ztop does depend non-trivially on a choice of symplectic
basis is perfectly compatible with the black hole interpretation of it: The choice of the
mixed ensemble also depends on which charges we choose as electric and which ones we
choose as magnetic. However topological string amplitudes tells us how the wave function
Ztop changes as we change this basis. For example if we switch the role of A and B cycles,
i.e. exchange electric and magnetic charges, the topological string partition function goes
to its Fourier transform. What does this mean for our black hole interpretation?
    To gain insight into this let us turn off the chemical potentials. So we have X Λ ∼
pΛ , FΣ ∼ qΣ . Let us denote

                                Ztop (X Λ ) = Ztop (pΛ ) = ψ̃(p)

                                Ztop (FΣ ) = Ztop (qΣ ) = ψ(q)

                                                 23
The fact that exchanging A and B cycles conjugates the variables implies that ψ(q) and
ψ̃(p) are Fourier transform of one another. In other words
                                     Z
                             ψ(q) = dp ψ̃(p) exp(2πipΛ qΛ )

(note that this expression is well defined in the perturbative topological string expansion
where q, p are not fixed to be integer).
    Let us relate these to black hole partition function. When we set chemical potentials
to zero we have
                                           X
                                 ZBH =          Ω(p, q) = |ψ̃(p)|2
                                            q
                                           X
                                 ZBH =          Ω(p, q) = |ψ(q)|2
                                            p

    We can invert this relation as well. Namely, if we are given the topologial string
amplitude ψ(q) we could ask how does this lead to Ω(p, q)? This can be done by inverting
the relation ZBH = |Ztop |2 and we find (ignoring for simplicity the discretization of charge,
which is fine to all orders in perturbative string expansion)

                                                              χ 2
                                    Z                   
                          Ω(p, q) = dχ exp(−pχ) ψ q + i
                                                              π

The fact that the topological string amplitude transforms as a wavefunction, i.e. that φ(p)
is Fourier transform of ψ(q) implies that even if we had chosen a different polarization we
would have gotten the same answer, in other words we can also write
                                                             2
                                                            i
                                      Z
                         Ω(p, q) =        dφ exp(−qφ) ψ̃ p + φ
                                                            π

Note that this relation between Ω and ψ or φ is a bit formal, and to makes sense of it we
have to choose a suitable contour. In fact this is the reason why Ω does not a priori have
to be positive. It is natural to choose the contour so it looks like a Fourier transform and
we have
                                                        χ ∗  χ
                                 Z                 
                     Ω(p, q) =       dχ exp(−ipχ) ψ q +   ψ q−
                                                        π      π
Note that this relation implies that Ω is real, but it is not necessarily positive. We recognize
Ω as the Wigner function associated to the wave function ψ. This is familiar in the
reformulation of quantum mechanics as a deformation quantization (see [44] for a review
and further references). In the context of this reformulation of quantum mechanics the

                                                 24
fact that Wigner’s function is a ‘quasi-probability distribution’ refers to the fact that Ω
need not be positive. For us this is also the case because Ω is an index of the black
hole. Even though the lack of positivity was a difficult thing to interpret in the context of
Wigner’s reformulation of quantum mechanics, it is perfectly natural for us in the context
of the relation between the black hole and topological strings: The black hole entropy is
an indexed object.
     These formulae are very suggestive and in need of a deeper physical explanation: Is
black hole teaching us about a reformulation of quantum mechanics? Are the black hole
information puzzles resolved in this new reformulation?



7. Further Issues

     In most of the preceding sections we have ignored important subtleties related to
background dependence. These subtleties arise in all three pictures. In the supergrav-
ity picture we have black hole fragmentation, in the dual CFT picture we have multiple
Coulomb branches and in the topological string picture we have the holomorphic anomaly.
Although we have not understood these issues in detail, we believe that they are different
manifestations of the same thing, and that a relation of the form ZCF T = ZBH = |Ztop |2
will survive these corrections. This section contains some preliminary discussion of these
issues.

7.1. Fragmentation and jumping lines

     Usually it is assumed that the number of BPS states of a single black hole depends
only on the charges of the black hole. However this is not quite true for the case of 4d
BPS black holes obtained from compactification of Type II superstrings on Calabi-Yau
threefolds. There are two main issues. The first one is that it is known that the number
of BPS states preserving half of the N = 2 supersymmetries does not depend just on
the charges; it was already discovered in [16] that the number of such states can jump
as we change the moduli of the scalars in the vector multiplet. This is likely related
to the black hole fragmentation discussed in [30] as well as the phenomenon of multiple
basins of attraction [31,32,33]. We thus expect ZBH not only to depend on X, which
captures the magnetic charge and the electric potentials, but also on the “background”,
i.e. the asymptotic value of the moduli in the supergravity solution. The asymptotic

                                             25
vector multiplet background is denoted by tV . (Possible hypermultiplet dependence is also
discussed below.)
    Next we ask whether or not tV dependence appears in the supersymmetric index,

                                                Λ
                                    Tr′ (−)F e−φ qΛ .
                                                  
                                                                                       (7.1)

In doing so we must specify whether the trace is over multi-black hole or single black
hole states. The spectrum of single black hole states changes erratically as the asymptotic
moduli cross basins of attraction or jumping lines. Hence the trace will be a discontinuous
function of the background moduli. The other option is to include multi-black-hole states
in the trace. However in that case the spectrum will in general have many continuous
parameters arising from the non-compact R3 positions of the black holes (which are never-
theless expected to yield finite answers due to the index nature of the computation). The
index can still be defined in this context, but it will depend on the asymptotic values of
the moduli. Hence either way we have background dependence. The best we can do is to
define the multi-black hole index which has a smooth background dependence:

                                ZBH = ZBH (pΛ , φΛ ; tV ).                             (7.2)

7.2. The holomorphic anomaly

    Now we come to the discussion of similar issues for the topological strings. It is known
that the perturbative topological string partition function depends on the background they
are expanded about. This is encoded in the holomorphic anomaly of topological strings
[1,17]. Thus, at least perturbatively we know that

                                  pert.    pert.
                                 Ztop   = Ztop   (X Λ ; tV ).                          (7.3)

This fits with the expectation on ZBH in the above. An important check would be to show
that the tV dependence in (7.2) agrees with that of (7.3).

7.3. Coulomb branches

    In the dual CFT picture we have the graded partition function ZCF T of fivebranes
with fluxes wrapping Calabi-Yau four-cycles, or D6 branes wrapping the Calabi-Yau. At
certain points of their moduli space, the fivebranes/D6 branes can fragment and move
apart in R3 . This again leads to dependence on tV .

                                             26
7.4. Hypermultiplets

    The dependence on background vector multiplets is however not the end of the story;
it is also known that the number of BPS states do change even as we change the hypermul-
tiplet moduli. To give a simple example, consider Type IIA strings compactified on the
quintic threefold. Suppose we wish to know the number of BPS D2 branes wrapping the
basic cycle of quintic once. It is known that the number of such D2 branes does depend
on the complex structure of the quintic. The complex structure in this case is part of the
hypermultiplet moduli. Thus we expect that the number of BPS states to also depend
on the background hypermultiplet moduli, which we denote by tH . In other words it is
already known that we should expect the relevant black hole partition function to be a
function of tH . However it is not clear whether or not this tH dependence persists when
we consider the index. Naively one may think it disappears.
    Some evidence that tH dependence may indeed persist is that there exist natural non-
perturbative completions of the topological string which depend on tH . This is for example
natural in the twistor application of topological strings [18] where the D-instantons of the
topological string play a role. As noted in [19,20] these D-branes couple to tH , and thus
we expect that the full non-perturbative topological string to also depend on it, in other
words one might expect non-perturbatively

                                       Ztop (X Λ ; tV , tH )

    If so it would be natural to expect that our relation continues to hold even after we
take into account these subtleties on both sides, taking the form

                          ZBH (X Λ ; tV , tH ) = |Ztop (X Λ ; tV , tH )|2              (7.4)

Consistency of this relation with tH -independence of perturbative topological string would
require that the dependence of the black hole entropy on hypermultiplets is not present
to all orders in the (1/Q) expansion, and only shows up in non-perturbative terms of the
form exp(−Q).
    It is also conceivable that there are other completions of topological strings which
do not depend on tH . This would in particular require setting the D-brane contributions
to zero by hand, as they clearly do couple to tH . If there were such alternative non-
perturbative definitions we could imagine having

                             index
                            ZBH    (X Λ ; tV ) = |Ztop (X Λ , tV )|2 .

                                                27
The question is analogous to asking “can we define alternative definitions of topological
Type II superstrings in which D-branes decouple?” One might think this is unlikely and
that the tH dependence of ZBH should be there. As is clear we have just opened up a
direction of investigation. Much more work is needed for a deeper understanding of the
beautiful link between topological strings and black holes.



                                  Acknowledgements
    We would like to thank M. Aganagic, F. Denef, R. Dijkgraaf, M. Douglas, G. Moore,
A. Neitzke, M. Rocek, A. van Proeyen and E. Witten for valuable discussions. The work of
HO was supported in part by DOE grant DE-FG03-92-ER40701, that of AS was supported
in part by DOE grant DE-FG02-96ER and that of CV was supported in part by NSF grants
PHY-0244821 and DMS-0244464.




                                            28
                                      References

 [1] M. Bershadsky, S. Ceccoti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Kodaira-Spencer theory of gravity
     and exact results for quantum string amplitudes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 165, 311
     (1994), hep-th/9309140.
 [2] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain and T. R. Taylor, “Topological amplitudes in
     string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 413, 162 (1994), hep-th/9307158.
 [3] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “M-theory and topological strings, I,II,” hep-th/9809187,
     hep-th/9812127.
 [4] J. C. Breckenridge, R. C. Myers, A. W. Peet and C. Vafa, “D-branes and spinning
     black holes,” Phys. Lett. B 391, 93 (1997), hep-th/9602065.
 [5] S. Katz, A. Klemm and C. Vafa, “M-theory, topological strings and spinning black
     holes,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 3, 1445 (1999), hep-th/9910181;
     T. J. Hollowood, A. Iqbal and C. Vafa, “Matrix models, geometric engineering and
     elliptic genera,” hep-th/0310272 .
 [6] S. Ferrara, R. Kallosh and A. Strominger, “N = 2 extremal black holes”, Phys. Rev.
     D52, 512 (1995), hep-th/9508072.
 [7] A. Strominger, “Macroscopic Entropy of N = 2 black holes,” Phys. Lett. B383 (1996)
     39, hep-th/9602111.
 [8] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Corrections to macroscopic super-
     symmetric black-hole entropy,” Phys. Lett. B 451, 309 (1999), hep-th/9812082.
 [9] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Deviations from the area law for
     supersymmetric black holes,” Fortsch. Phys. 48, 49 (2000), hep-th/9904005.
[10] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Macroscopic entropy formulae and
     non-holomorphic corrections for supersymmetric black holes,” Nucl. Phys. B 567, 87
     (2000), hep-th/9906094.
[11] G. W. Moore, “Les Houches lectures on strings and arithmetic,” hep-th/0401049.
[12] A. Strominger and C. Vafa, “On the microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking
     entropy,” Phys. Lett. B379 (1996) 99, hep-th/9601029.
[13] J. M. Maldacena, A. Strominger and E. Witten, “Black hole entropy in M-theory,”
     JHEP 9712, 002 (1997), hep-th/9711053.
[14] A. Iqbal, N. Nekrasov, A. Okounkov and C. Vafa, “Quantum foam and topological
     strings,” hep-th/0312022.
[15] E. Witten, “Quantum background independence in string theory,” hep-th/9306122.
[16] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Electric-magnetic duality, monopole condensation, and
     confinement in N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 426, 19
     (1994) [Erratum-ibid. B 430, 485 (1994)], hep-th/9407087.
[17] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Holomorphic anomalies in topo-
     logical field theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 405, 279 (1993), hep-th/9302103.

                                           29
[18] E. Witten, “Perturbative gauge theory as a string theory in twistor space,” hep-
     th/0312171.
[19] A. Neitzke and C. Vafa, “N = 2 strings and the twistorial Calabi-Yau,” hep-
     th/0402128.
[20] N. Nekrasov, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “S-duality and topological strings,” hep-
     th/0403167.
[21] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Area law corrections from state
     counting and supergravity,” Class. Quant. Grav. 17, 1007 (2000), hep-th/9910179.
[22] R. M. Wald, “Black hole entropy in the Noether charge,” Phys. Rev. D 48, 3427
     (1993), gr-qc/9307038;
     V. Iyer and R. M. Wald, “Some properties of Noether charge and a proposal for
     dynamical black hole entropy,” Phys. Rev. D 50, 846 (1994), gr-qc/9403028.
[23] T. Mohaupt, “Black hole entropy, special geometry and strings,” Fortsch. Phys. 49,
     3 (2001), hep-th/0007195.
[24] E. Witten, “On the structure of the topological phase of two-dimensional gravity,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 340, 281 (1990).
[25] A. Okounkov, N. Reshetikhin and C. Vafa, “Quantum Calabi-Yau and classical crys-
     tals,” hep-th/0309208.
[26] E. Sokatchev, “A superspace action for N = 2 supergravity,” Phys. Lett. B 100, 466
     (1981).
[27] A. Strominger, “AdS2 quantum gravity and string theory,” JHEP 9901, 007 (1999)
     hep-th/9809027.
[28] S. Kachru, A. Klemm, W. Lerche, P. Mayr and C. Vafa, ‘Nonperturbative results on
     the point particle limit of N = 2 heterotic string compactifications,” Nucl. Phys. B
     459, 537 (1996), hep-th/9508155;
     A. Klemm, W. Lerche, P. Mayr, C. Vafa and N. P. Warner, “Self-dual strings and
     N = 2 supersymmetric field theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 477, 746 (1996), hep-th/9604034.
[29] S. Cecotti, P. Fendley, K. A. Intriligator and C. Vafa, “A new supersymmetric index,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 386, 405 (1992), hep-th/9204102.
[30] J. M. Maldacena, J. Michelson and A. Strominger, “Anti-de Sitter fragmentation,”
     JHEP 9902, 011 (1999), hep-th/9812073.
[31] G. W. Moore, “Arithmetic and attractors,” hep-th/9807087.
[32] G. W. Moore, “Attractors and arithmetic,” hep-th/9807056.
[33] F. Denef, “Supergravity flows and D-brane stability,” JHEP 0008, 050 (2000), hep-
     th/0005049.
[34] M. Bershadsky, C. Vafa and V. Sadov, “D-branes and topological field theories,” Nucl.
     Phys. B 463, 420 (1996), hep-th/9511222.
[35] L. Baulieu, H. Kanno and I. M. Singer, “Special quantum field theories in eight and
     other dimensions,” Commun. Math. Phys. 194, 149 (1998), hep-th/9704167;

                                            30
       B. S. Acharya, M. O’Loughlin and B. Spence, “Higher-dimensional analogues of
       Donaldson-Witten theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 503, 657 (1997), hep-th/9705138;
       M. Blau and G. Thompson, “Euclidean SYM theories by time reduction and special
       holonomy manifolds,” Phys. Lett. B 415, 242 (1997), hep-th/9706225.
[36]   S. Donaldson and R. Thomas, “Gauge theory in higher dimensions,” in The geometric
       universe; science, geometry, and the work of Roger Penrose, S. Huggett et. al eds.,
       Oxford Univ. Press. 1998.
[37]   D. Maulik, N. Nekrasov, A. Okounkov and R. Pandharipande, “Gromov-Witten theory
       and Donaldson-Thomas theory,” math.AG/0312059.
[38]   A. Kapustin, “Gauge theory, topological strings, and S-duality,” hep-th/0404041.
[39]   E. Witten, “Two-dimensional gauge theories revisited,” J. Geom. Phys. 9, 303 (1992),
       hep-th/9204083.
[40]   D. J. Gross, “Two-dimensional QCD as a string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 400, 161
       (1993), hep-th/9212149.
[41]   D. J. Gross and W. I. Taylor, “Two-dimensional QCD is a string theory,” Nucl. Phys.
       B 400, 181 (1993), hep-th/9301068; “Twists and Wilson loops in the string theory
       of two-dimensional QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B 403, 395 (1993), hep-th/9303046.
[42]   S. Cordes, G. W. Moore and S. Ramgoolam, “Large N 2-D Yang-Mills theory and
       topological string theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 185, 543 (1997), hep-th/9402107.
[43]   R. Dijkgraaf, E. Verlinde and M. Vonk, “On the partition sum of the NS five-brane,”
       hep-th/0205281.
[44]   C. K. Zachos, “Deformation quantization: Quantum mechanics lives and works in
       phase-space,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17, 297 (2002), hep-th/0110114.




                                             31
