                                                                                                   IASSNS-HEP-92/45
                                        @vepicture                                                 July, 1992




                                      CHERN-SIMONS GAUGE THEORY AS A STRING THEORY




arXiv:hep-th/9207094v2 22 Dec 2003
                                                                                        ⋆
                                                                    Edward Witten


                                                                 School of Natural Sciences
                                                                Institute for Advanced Study
                                                                        Olden Lane
                                                                    Princeton, NJ 08540




                                                                       ABSTRACT

                                        Certain two dimensional topological field theories can be interpreted as string
                                     theory backgrounds in which the usual decoupling of ghosts and matter does not
                                     hold. Like ordinary string models, these can sometimes be given space-time inter-
                                     pretations. For instance, three-dimensional Chern-Simons gauge theory can arise
                                     as a string theory. The world-sheet model in this case involves a topological sigma
                                     model. Instanton contributions to the sigma model give rise to Wilson line in-
                                     sertions in the space-time Chern-Simons theory. A certain holomorphic analog of
                                     Chern-Simons theory can also arise as a string theory.




                                       ⋆ Research supported in part by NSF Grant PHY91-06210.
                                 1. Introduction

    In this paper, I will describe how Chern-Simons gauge theory in three dimen-
sions can be viewed as a string theory. The string theory in question will be
constructed using a topological sigma model [1] (related to Floer/Gromov theory)
in which the target space is T ∗ M, M being a three-manifold. The perturbation
theory of this string theory will coincide with Chern-Simons perturbation theory,
in the form that this has been presented by Axelrod and Singer [4] and further
studied by Kontsevich [5]. Mathematically, the idea is roughly that there are no
instantons with target space T ∗ M and boundary values in M, so in an appropri-
ate topological field theory, the usual counting of instantons is vacuous. However,
there are virtual instantons at infinity; their proper counting leads to Chern-Simons
perturbation theory. Chern-Simons theory enters in this particular string theory
in much the same way that ordinary space-time physics (with general relativity as
the long wavelength limit) arises in conventional string theory.

    Physically, one might take the following as the starting point. String theorists
usually construct two dimensional field theories describing particular classical solu-
tions of string theory by constructing a “matter” system, of total central charge 26,
and coupling it to the ghosts, of central charge −26. The vanishing total central
charge ensures the existence of a BRST operator Q, obeying Q2 = 0, and playing
a crucial role in world-sheet and space-time gauge invariance. One knows, however
[7], that Q can be interpreted as a generator of linearized gauge transformations,
mixing ghosts and matter, so the assumption that the matter and ghosts are de-
coupled cannot be valid as a fundamental principle; it is merely a (partial) gauge
condition and very likely cannot be imposed at all in some situations, perhaps time
dependent ones.

    So in §2, we will ask what is left of the standard structure if one does not
assume decoupling of matter from ghosts. From the discussion, it will become
obvious that exotic realizations of the same basic structure can be constructed
using topological sigma models; we therefore do this in §3. The resulting models

                                          2
can be considered for either open or closed strings, but the open string case is in
some ways easier to understand. In §4, we use open-string field theory as a short-
cut to determining the space-time interpretation of the open-string version of our
models, with the result - alluded to above - that one type of model is equivalent
in perturbation theory to three dimensional Chern-Simons gauge theory. This is
possibly the first time that the background independent, gauge invariant space-
time interpretation of a string theory has been completely determined. (But see
[8] for a previous investigation of the space-time interpretation of some topological
string theories of a rather different flavor.) As one application, our result explains
certain observations by Kontsevich about Chern-Simons gauge theory, and we will
make a small digression on that account. Another version of the theory has for its
space-time interpretation a sort of holomorphic version of Chern-Simons theory.
In §5, we attempt to discuss the closed string sector (which among other things
should be more closely related to usual manifestations of mirror symmetry). This
concluding section is brief since I do not understand it.

    To keep this paper within reasonable length, it has not been possible to give a
self-contained explanation of all of the relevant background. The relevant material
on topological sigma models can be found in [6]; for their coupling to topological
gravity see [1]. The relation of Riemann surfaces to gauge theories will be briefly
recalled presently. Apart from this, it is helpful to have some familiarity with
construction of string models, the relation between world-sheet and space-time
physics, string field theory, and Chern-Simons perturbation theory. The main
point of the paper is the unexpected relation of those latter topics to each other
and to topological sigma models.



Riemann Surfaces And Gauge Theories

    Riemann surfaces enter our story in two ways. On the one hand, when we
study two dimensional quantum field theory, Riemann surfaces are present at the
beginning. Then we wish to show how gauge theory in the target space emerges.

                                          3
             (a)                               (b)


                                                              k
                                                       j
                                               i

    Fig. 1. A two loop Feynman diagram (a) and its thickening (b), in which
    the boundary components are labeled by gauge indices.




    Fig. 2. The cell decomposition of open string moduli space depends on
    building Riemann surfaces by gluing together flat strips Si of width π and
    variable length Ti , 0 ≤ Ti ≤ ∞. The strips are glued together in groups of
    three along the dotted lines; their midpoints meet in conical singularities
    of deficit angle −π that are marked as solid dots. The resemblance of this
    figure to figure (1) is central in this paper.

    On the other hand, oriented two dimensional manifolds arise in gauge theories
with U(N) gauge group in the following fashion, due originally to ‘t Hooft [9];
see also [10,§4] for a recent explanation. (SO(N) and Sp(N) can be considered
similarly and lead to not necessarily orientable Riemann surfaces.) Though the
following general comments also go through for ordinary Yang-Mills theory in any
dimension, let us to be definite consider the Chern-Simons action for a U(N)-valued
connection A on a three manifold M:
                             Z                       
                         k                  2
                     I=          Tr A ∧ dA + A ∧ A ∧ A .                       (1.1)
                        4π                  3
                             M


Consider expanding this theory in perturbation theory in 1/k, say around the triv-
ial connection. The successive terms are all topological invariants. The coefficient

                                         4
of 1/k r comes from Feynman diagrams with r loops, and is a function of N. For
given r, by considering the dependence on N, how many invariants can be ex-
tracted? This question can be conveniently answered as follows. The gauge field
A is essentially a one-form valued in hermitian N × N matrices. Write A as Ai j ,
i, j = 1 . . . N, making the matrix indices explicit while leaving implicit the fact
that A is a one-form. The interaction

                         Tr A ∧ A ∧ A = Ai j ∧ Aj k ∧ Ak i                     (1.2)

involves sewing the “lower” index of one A field to the “upper” index of the next.
To exhibit this in drawing Feynman diagrams, represent the A propagator not as
a line but as a slightly thickened band in which one edge represents the “upper”
index and the other line represents the “lower” index. The index flow at the cubic
vertex (1.2) is then neatly incorporated by smoothly joining the bands, as in figure
(1(b)). In the process, the Feynman diagram of figure (1(a)) has been replaced by
the Riemann surface Σ of figure (1(b)). Each boundary component is labeled by
a gauge index i running from 1 to N. If there are h boundary components, the
sum over gauge indices gives a factor of N h . The coefficients of N h /k r are the
three-manifold invariants that can be extracted from Chern-Simons theory with
gauge group U(N).

   The genus of Σ is g = (r − h + 1)/2. As r and h vary, g and h vary in-
dependently, and Σ varies over all topological types of oriented two dimensional
surface with boundary. Thus, U(N) gauge theory gives us a three manifold invari-
ant Γg,h (M) for every topological type of oriented two dimensional surface with
boundary. On the other hand, in §3-4 we will consider a two dimensional topolog-
ical field theory (closely related to the counting of almost holomorphic curves) in
which one can conveniently take the target space to be T ∗ M, the cotangent bundle
of a three-manifold M. The partition function Zg,h(M) of this theory formulated
on a Riemann surface of genus g with h holes is, again, a three-manifold invariant
depending on g and h. Our main conclusion is that Γg,h (M) = Zg,h (M). In reach-
ing this conclusion, the link between the Riemann surfaces of the two dimensional

                                         5
field theory and those of U(N) gauge theory is provided by the fatgraph [11–13] or
open string field theory [14,15] description of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces
with boundary; in this description, complex Riemann surfaces are built up from
pictures similar to that of figure (1(b)), as we will recall in more detail in §4.



                                     2. Axioms

    In this section, we will discuss what remains of the usual structures in string
theory if one does not assume that ghosts and matter are decoupled. Σ will be a
Riemann surface of genus g with local coordinates xα , α = 1, 2. The symbols J
and h will be used to denote a complex structure and a metric on Σ; of course a
metric determines a complex structure. The space of all complex structures will be
called J ; the group of diffeomorphisms of Σ will be called G. The quotient J /G
is the moduli space of complex structures on Σ. The space of metrics on Σ will be
called K.

    Usually one considers conformally invariant world-sheeet theories consisting of
“matter,” of central charge c = 26, and “ghosts,” of c = −26. As explained in the
introduction, we want to drop the assumption of this decoupling; so if conformal
invariance is retained, we preserve the fact that the total central charge is c = 0,
but no longer build this from a cancellation between different contributions. We
will, however, not necessarily retain the assumption of conformal invariance.

    One part of the structure that must be kept for all that follows is the existence
of a BRST operator Q with Q2 = 0, and with the further property that the stress-
tensor Tαβ can be written as


                                   Tαβ = {Q, bαβ },                              (2.1)


for some field bαβ – which in the usual case is called the antighost field. This
ensures general covariance – or topological invariance – of the two dimensional

                                          6
theory. In the conformally invariant case, b and T are traceless. The stress tensor
is conserved, Dα T α β = 0, and so we will assume that the b field obeys


                                           Dα bα β = 0                              (2.2)


which when b is traceless is its usual equation of motion. In addition, in the usual
constructions, there are no short-distance singularities in operator products of b
fields, and there are only the standard short-distance singularities in products of
b and T . Concerning the generalization, topological sigma models are an example
showing that these assumptions are too strong. In those models, there is a delta
function contact term in the b · T product. (This results in the ρρψψ term in
the coupling to topological gravity, eqn. (4.18) of [1].) I do not know what sort
of singularities should be allowed in b · b and b · T operator products, in general,
except to say that they must be such that a coupling of the model to topological
gravity must be possible.

      Another feature of the usual case that we wish to preserve is that there is a
“ghost number” operator G (mathematically it would usually be called the dimen-
sion), with Q and b having G = 1 and G = −1, respectively. Moreover, we wish to
preserve the usual fact that the “ghost number of the vacuum” is −3χ(Σ) where
χ(Σ) is the Euler characteristic of Σ; this means that only an operator product of
total ghost number 3χ(Σ) can have a non-zero vacuum expectation value. For in-
stance, for an orientable Riemann surface of genus g, the case that we will consider
in this section for definiteness, 3χ(Σ) = −(6g − 6).

      A particularly important case (in genus ≥ 2 for simplicity, to avoid ghost zero
modes) is the expectation value of a product of 6g−6 b’s. Let δ (k) h, k = 1, . . . , 6g−6
be 6g − 6 variations of h (that is, 6g − 6 tangent vectors to the space K of metrics).
Let
                                   Z       √    ′   ′
                         (k)
                        b      =       d2 x hhαα hββ δ (k) hαβ · bα′ β ′            (2.3)
                                   Σ


                                                 7
be the corresponding modes of b, and let


                        Θ(δ (1) h, . . . , δ (6g−6) h) = hb(1) . . . b(6g−6) i,                  (2.4)


with h     i the expectation value in the “measure” determined by the genus g
world-sheet path integral. By fermi statistics, Θ is skew-symmetric in the δ (k) h’s
and so can be interpreted as a 6g − 6 form on K. In the usual case, one proves
that Θ is closed starting with

                                         6g−5
                                         X
                (1)      (6g−5)
     0 = h{Q, b       ...b        }i =         (−1)j−1 hb(1) . . . {Q, b(j) } . . . b(6g−5) i.   (2.5)
                                         j=1



Then using (2.1) to write {Q, b(j) } as a moment of T , and interpreting the insertion
of T as a derivative on K, one can interpret (2.5) as a first order differential equation
for Θ which amounts to

                                                dΘ = 0.                                          (2.6)


This proof goes through in general if the b·b and b·T operator products are standard;
however, topological sigma models are an example in which the definition of Θ must
be modified by addition of contact terms to ensure dΘ = 0. A successful coupling
of the model to topological gravity will always ensure the existence of a suitable
modification (by addition of contact terms) of the definition of Θ.

    Θ is obviously diffeomorphism invariant. Moreover, in the usual case it is
“basic”; that is, it vanishes if any δ (k) h is of the form δ (k) hαβ = Dα vβ + Dβ vα
induced by an infinitesimal diffeomorphism xα → xα + ǫv α . This is proved by
integrating by parts, using (2.2) and the absence of short distance singularities of
the b’s. In general (because of the relation of the topological gravity multiplet to
the equivariant cohomology of the diffeomorphism group), a successful coupling to
topological gravity will always ensure that Θ is basic.

                                                    8
    The fact that Θ is basic and diffeomorphism invariant means that it can be
interpreted as the pullback of a closed 6g − 6 form ν on the space K/G of metrics
modulo diffeomorphisms. In the conformally invariant case, Θ is actually a pullback
from a form µ on the moduli space M of complex structures; as M is 6g − 6
dimensional, µ is a top form or measure on M. If conformal invariance does not
hold, there is no natural way to construct from µ a measure on M, but the fact
that ν is closed, dν = 0, is almost as good. It means that if s is a section of the
bundle K/G → M, and µ = s∗ (ν), then µ is independent of the choice of s, modulo
an exact form. µ is the desired 6g − 6-form on M.

Vertex Operators And Ghosts

    The most traditional string theory vertex operators can be written W = ccV
where c and c are the ghosts and V is a spin (1, 1) conformal field constructed
from matter fields only. It is well known in the operator formalism [16] that these
conditions can be relaxed. The only really essential properties of W in conventional
string theory are that it have ghost number 2, spin zero, and be annihilated by
Q, and that the Fock space state corresponding to W should be annihilated by
an operator usually written as b0 − = b0 − b0 (here b0 and b0 are the zero modes
of left- and right-moving ghosts). The requirement that W have spin zero and
be annihilated by b0 − ensures that the analogs of Θ defined with an insertion of
W have the essential properties that entered above (diffeomorphism invariant and
basic). The ghost number two condition shifts the ghost number of the vacuum,
leading in a natural way to measures on the moduli space of Riemann surfaces
with marked points.

    These conditions make sense in our abstract setting, and can be borrowed
bodily, except that if we do not assume conformal invariance, the definition of b0 −
                         H
must be written b0 − = dxα bα0 . (The integration is over a parametrized circle
and “0” is the normal direction to the circle.) Note, therefore, that in including
vertex operators, we need make no explicit mention of the ghosts; only the product
W = ccV , and not the separate factors in that product, needs to be generalized.

                                         9
Where, therefore, do the ghosts appear in the discussion? Of course, the antighosts
entered in the definition of the measure for g ≥ 2; but what about the ghosts?

    We perhaps could “find” the ghosts by trying to generalize the usual definition
of the genus one measure – as c and c each has a zero mode on a surface of genus one.
To get a different perspective, I will instead discuss the issue from the standpoint
of closed string field theory.

    In closed string field theory as we know it today (see [17] for a review), the
string field Ψ is a vector in a string Hilbert space obtained by quantization on a
circle S. Picking a parametrization of the circle, let L0 − = L0 −L0 be the generator
of a rotation of the circle, and let c0 − = (c0 − c0 )/2. Ψ is required to obey

                                 L0 − Ψ = b0 − Ψ = 0.                              (2.7)

The quadratic part of the Lagrangian is

                                               
                                     Ψ, c0 − QΨ ,                                  (2.8)

and the linearized gauge invariance is

                                      δΨ = Qǫ,                                     (2.9)

where ǫ has ghost number 1 and

                                      b0 − ǫ = 0.                                 (2.10)

This is proved to be a gauge invariance as follows. In the usual theory, (2.10)
implies that

                                      ǫ = b0 − α                                  (2.11)

for some α. Inserting this in (2.8), and using

                                   {b0 − , c0 − } = 1,                            (2.12)

                                           10
together with

                                   {Q, b0 − } = L0 −                            (2.13)

(which is a consequence of (2.1)) along with (2.7), one verifies the invariance of
(2.8).

    What are the essential points that should be retained if the ghosts and matter
fields are not decoupled? In conventional string theory, one has

                                              2
                                       b0 −        = 0,                         (2.14)


a consequence of the absence of singularities in the b · b operator products. This
property also holds in topological sigma models, and it seems reasonable to insist
on it in general even if one permits some kind of b · b singularities. The ability to
write ǫ as in (2.11) is then the assertion that the cohomology of b0 − vanishes in
ghost number 1. If the cohomology of b0 − is altogether zero, then there exists an
operator c0 − obeying (2.12). Moreover, c0 − is uniquely determined modulo c0 − →
c0 − + {b0 − , f } for some f ; using (2.7) and (2.13), one sees that the Lagrangian
(2.8) is invariant under such a shift of c0 − . Thus, (2.14) and the trivial cohomology
of b0 − are sufficient requirements for free closed string field theory (and I believe
also for the interacting case).

    What if the cohomology of b0 − is not zero? Then using (2.13) and the fact that
the cohomology can be represented by states invariant under the compact group
generated by L0 − (and in any case since the physical field Ψ is required to have
this invariance), we see that Q generates a linear transformation of the cohomology
of b0 − . If this linear transformation is zero, there will be an operator c0 − obeying
not (2.12) but

                          {b0 − , c0 − }Q = Q{b0 − , c0 − } = Q.                (2.15)

This actually is enough to ensure the gauge invariance of the free Lagrangian (2.8).
(If the cohomology of b0 − is nonzero in ghost number one, one cannot use (2.11);

                                              11
but the fact that Q annihilates the cohomology of b0 − means that for ǫ annihilated
by b0 − and L0 − , one can write Qǫ = b0 − β for some β; this is good enough.)
Topological sigma models give an example in which the cohomology of b0 − is non-
zero, but annihilated by Q. We therefore can write down closed string field theory
in this case, but as we will see in §5, it seems difficult to understand it.

A Conundrum

    The conundrum that I want to state is obvious. The properties of conventional
string backgrounds that I have cited are the only ones I know of that make sense
in the general case in which ghosts and matter are not decoupled. Yet they are
so general as to permit bizarre realizations, like the topological sigma models that
we will consider presently. Are they adequate and if not how should they be
supplemented?

    The following example will perhaps serve to sharpen the puzzle. In Type II
superstring theory, it is usually supposed that a classical solution is described by a
superconformal world-sheet theory. One therefore might expect and hope to sup-
plement the above discussion with general properties of superconformal symmetry.
Yet it has been pointed out [18] that Ramond-Ramond vertex operators do not
commute with the left- or right-moving superconformal currents, and consequently
that when such vertex operators are added to the world-sheet Lagrangian (as one
would expect in a generic time-dependent situation), the world-sheet theory is not
superconformal. Therefore, the structure of Type II backgrounds, at the general
level of our above discussion, looks hard to distinguish from that of bosonic string
theory. If we do not wish to claim that bosonic strings and Type II superstrings are
the same theory (and I would be skeptical of that interpretation), we apparently
must find general properties of the world-sheet theory that go well beyond the ones
I have cited.




                                          12
              3. Realizations Via Topological Field Theories

    We will now use topological sigma models to make some realizations of the
structure just explained. There are two classes of such models [6,19,20], which I
will call the A and B models following some of the papers just cited.

    These models govern maps from a Riemann surface Σ to a target space X,
which must be presented with an almost complex structure, in the case of the A
model, or an actual complex structure, for the B model. The A model is concerned
with almost holomorphic maps from Σ to X, while the B model is related to periods
of differential forms on X. The B model is only well-defined for X obeying the
Calabi-Yau condition c1 (X) = 0. The A model is defined without that condition,
but obeys the axioms of §2 (definite ghost number of the vacuum) only if c1 (X) = 0.
Therefore, we will limit ourselves to Calabi-Yau target spaces. This is, of course,
also the case in which the sigma model is conformally invariant.

    For either the A or B models, the ghost number of the vacuum is −d·χ(Σ), with
d = dim C
        I (X). This coincides with the desired valued −3χ(Σ) that played such an
important role in §2 precisely if d = 3, and therefore we will limit ourselves to this
case. It is curious to note that this is the same value of d that arises in the usual
“physical” applications of Calabi-Yau manifolds in superstring compactification.

    General tangent space indices to X will be written as I, J, K, while indices of
type (1, 0) or (0, 1) will be written as i, j, k or i, j, k, respectively. We consider X as
a Kahler manifold endowed with a Ricci-flat Kahler metric gij̄ . The bosonic fields
of the A or B models are simply a map Φ : Σ → X; if we pick local coordinates φI
on X, this map can be described by giving functions φI (xα ). It is also convenient
to pick a local complex coordinate z on Σ.

The A Model

    The detailed construction of the A and B models is explained in [6]. In the A
model, the fermi fields are a section χI of Φ∗ (T X), and a one-form ψ with values
in Φ∗ (T X). ψ obeys a self-duality condition which says that its (1, 0) part ψzi has

                                            13
values in Φ∗ (T 0,1 X), and its (0, 1) form ψzi has values in Φ∗ (T 1,0 X). The BRST
transformation laws are

                                    δφI = iαχI
                                   δχI = 0
                                                                                                      (3.1)
                                   δψzī = −α∂z φī − iαχj̄ Γīj̄m ψzm
                                   δψzi = −α∂z φi − iαχj Γijm ψzm

with α an anticommuting parameter and Γ the affine connnection of X. The BRST
operator Q is defined by writing δΛ = −iα{Q, Λ} for any field Λ. The Lagrangian
can be written in the form L = i{Q, V } with any V such that L is nondegenerate.
A suitable choice of V is
                                      Z                                  
                               V =t       d2 z gij ψzi ∂z̄ φj + ∂z φi ψzj                             (3.2)
                                      Σ

(with d2 z = |dz ∧ dz|) and gives
            Z                                                                                        
                          1
   L = 2t        2
                d z         gIJ ∂z φI ∂z φJ + iψzi Dz χi gii + iψzi Dz χi gii − Riijj ψzi ψzi χj χj
                          2
            Σ
                                                                                                      (3.3)
with t a constant.

    The fact that L = i{Q, V } means that the t dependence (and dependence on
the target space metric) of (3.3) is of the form {Q, . . .} and so does not affect the
BRST invariant physics. As weak coupling means large t, the fact that there is no
t dependence means that weak coupling is exact.

    The dependence on the metric of Σ is likewise of the form {Q, . . .}, so we can
write Tαβ = {Q, bαβ } where at the classical level
                                                                         
                     bαβ = itgIJ ψαI ∂β φJ + ψβI ∂α φJ − hαβ hστ ψσI ∂τ φJ .                          (3.4)

Quantum mechanically, the formula for b requires modification except in the
Calabi-Yau case (T and b will no longer be traceless), but an appropriate b still ex-

                                                    14
ists, as the theory admits a higher derivative regularization preserving the fermionic
symmetry.

The B Model

    In the B model, the fermi fields include first of all sections η i , θi of Φ∗ (T 0,1 X);
actually, it is convenient to write the formulas in terms of not θī but θj = gji θi . The
other fermi fields are a one-form ρi with values in Φ∗ (T 1,0 X). The transformation
laws are
                                         δφi = 0
                                         δφi = iαη ī
                                                                                                (3.5)
                                          δη ī = δθi = 0
                                          δρi = −α dφi

and the Lagrangian is again of the form L = i{Q, V }; for a suitable V , one gets

                       Z       
                L =t       d2 z gIJ ∂z φI ∂z̄ φJ + iη ī (Dz ρiz̄ + Dz̄ ρiz )giī
                       Σ                                                                        (3.6)
                                                                                        
                            +iθi (Dz̄ ρz − Dz ρz̄ ) + Riīj j̄ ρiz ρjz̄ η ī θk g kj̄
                                          i            i
                                                                                            .


The physics is independent of the coupling parameter t for the same reason as in
the A model.

    In this case, we can write Tαβ = {Q, bαβ } with

                                                                     
                 bαβ = itgIJ ρIα ∂β φJ + ρIβ ∂α φJ − hαβ hστ ρIσ ∂τ φJ .                        (3.7)




                                                  15
 3.1. Boundary Conditions

    In our applications, we will want to formulate these theories on Riemann sur-
faces Σ that may have non-empty boundary. In doing so, we require a boundary
         ⋆
condition. We want local, elliptic boundary conditions that preserve the fermionic
symmetry. I will explain natural boundary conditions for both the A and B model,
but there may very well be other natural boundary conditions – perhaps required
for mirror symmetry – that should be considered.

    The A model is closely related to Floer theory, and the boundary condition
                                                                                      †
that I want to consider for the A model is the one that was studied by Floer. For
each component Ci of ∂Σ, we pick a Lagrangian submanifold Mi of the Kahler
manifold X. For instance, in the nicest case, there may be a real involution τi of
X, and Mi may be a component of the fixed point set of τi . Let T Mi and NMi
be the tangent and normal bundles to Mi in X; we regard them as the real and
imaginary subbundles of T X|Mi . Then regarding Ci as a real locus in the complex
Riemann surface Σ, we require that the boundary values should be real in the
following sense: Φ|Ci is real, that is it maps Ci to Mi ; the normal derivative to Φ
at Ci is imaginary (it takes values in Φ∗ (NMi )); χ and the pullback of ψ to Mi are
real (they take values in Φ∗ (T Mi )). These boundary conditions make sense even
if Mi does not arise as the fixed point set of a real involution.

    For the B model, we pick instead “free” boundary conditions that do not
require anything analogous to the choice of the Mi . We require that the normal
derivative of Φ vanishes on ∂Σ, that θ vanishes on ∂Σ, and that the pullback to
∂Σ of ⋆ρ vanishes (⋆ being here the Hodge star operator).




  ⋆ For some generalities about topological field theories on Riemann surfaces with boundary,
    and some specifics about the A model, see [21].
  † Readers to whom these boundary conditions may seem strange at first sight are invited to
    try to find other local, elliptic, Q-invariant boundary conditions for the A model.

                                            16
 3.2. Boundary Terms

    Now, we further wish to couple this system to target space gauge fields in
the sense of string theory, that is to gauge fields on X. This will be done by
introducing Chan-Paton factors, that is by coupling the gauge fields to “charges”
that propagate on ∂Σ. These charges are string theory analogs of the labels on the
boundaries in figure (1(b)), and will reduce to the latter when we make contact
with target space Chern-Simons theory. Just as in the construction leading to
figure (1(b)), we must take the gauge group to be U(N) if we want to consider
oriented Riemann surfaces only; SO(N) and Sp(N) are possible if one wishes to
permit unoriented surfaces. The restriction on the gauge group is not needed in
the preliminary discussion of the present section but is essential in §4.

    The quantum version of either of the models we have introduced is described
by a Feynman path integral
                                Z
                                    DΨi exp(−L(Ψi )),                              (3.8)


where Ψi are the various fields and L is the Lagrangian. Let now A = AI dφI
be a connection with structure group U(N) on a rank N complex vector bundle
E over X. Let Σ be an oriented Riemann surface whose boundary is a disjoint
union of circles Ci . The orientation of Σ induces an orientation of each Ci . Given
Φ : Σ → X, for each Ci we can take the trace of the holonomy of Φ∗ (A) around
Ci ; we write this as
                                               I
                                    Tr P exp        Φ∗ (A).                        (3.9)
                                               Ci

(The trace is taken in the defining N dimensional representation of U(N).) Then,
tentatively, the coupling to gauge fields in the target space is accomplished by
replacing (3.8) by
                     Z                             Y               I
                         DΨi exp(−L(Ψi )) ·             Tr P exp        Φ∗ (A).   (3.10)
                                                    i              Ci


                                           17
(For the B model, this will require some modification.) If A is trivial, this is
simply a factor of N for each boundary component, just as in the evaluation of the
Feynman amplitude of figure (1(b)).

    We must determine whether this modification of the path integral preserves the
fermionic symmetry. In general the variation of the trace of the holonomy about
a circle C is
                    I                I               J                        I
                         ∗                    I dφ
       δ Tr P exp       Φ (A) = Tr       δφ              FIJ (τ )dτ · P exp       Φ∗ (A).   (3.11)
                                               dτ
                    C                C                                    C;τ

                                    H
Here τ is a coordinate on C, and exp C;τ Φ∗ (A) is the holonomy of Φ∗ (A) around
C, starting and ending at τ ; and FIJ (or more fastidiously Φ∗ (FIJ )) are the com-
ponents of the pullback by Φ of the space-time curvature F = dA + A ∧ A.

The A Model

    In the case of the A model, since Φ∗ (Ci ) ⊂ Mi , the bundle E and connection
A actually need only be defined on the union of the Mi , not on all of X.

    Inserting the A model transformation law δφI = iαχI in (3.11), we see that
the holonomy factors in (3.10) are invariant under the fermionic symmetry if and
only if the space-time curvature F vanishes. Thus, in the A model, it is possible
to couple only to flat connections on the Mi . We will give this a more intuitive
explanation in §4, where we will see that the target space physics of the A model
is Chern-Simons gauge theory on the Mi . The classical solutions of Chern-Simons
gauge theory are precisely the flat connections. Thus, the requirement of the A
model that the target space connection must be flat is a special case of the fact that
in string theory, the background fields that can be incorporated in the world-sheet
theory are always classical solutions of the space-time theory.

    Since A is flat, its role is from some points of view almost trivial. The homotopy
factors in (3.10) depend only on the topology of Σ and the choice of a homotopy
class of maps Φ : Σ → X, in which one is evaluating the functional integral.

                                                 18
But deeper aspects of the theory involve summing over the topology of Σ and
the homotopy type of Φ, and then the factors coming from holonomies of a flat
connection on X fit together coherently (to give, as we will see, Chern-Simons
theory expanded around the given flat connection A).

The B Model

    The situation in the B model is similar but more subtle. Plugging the transfor-
mation laws δφi = 0, δφi = iαη i into (3.11), we find that the holonomy is invariant
under the fermionic symmetry if and only if the (1, 1) and (0, 2) parts of the curva-
ture vanish. The vanishing (0, 2) curvature asserts that the (0, 1) part of A defines
a holomorphic structure on the bundle E; the additional vanishing of the (1, 1)
curvature says that A is a holomorphic connection (locally it can be represented
by a holomorphic one-form of type (1, 0)). The latter condition is rather restrictive
and we wish to eliminate it. This can be done as follows. Replace Φ∗ (A) by the
following “improved” connection on the bundle Φ∗ (E) over Σ:

                                 e = Φ∗ (A) − iη i F ρj .
                                 A                                                  (3.12)
                                                    ij


Then using the transformation laws of the B model, one readily sees that for any
circle C ⊂ Σ, the trace of the holonomy
                                                 I
                                      Tr P exp       e
                                                     A                              (3.13)
                                                 C

   e is invariant under the fermionic symmetry, provided that the (0, 2) part of the
of A
curvature of A vanishes, that is provided A determines a holomorphic structure
on E. Thus, the formula (3.10) for coupling external gauge fields to the A model
should be modified, in the case of the B model, to
                    Z                      Y           I
                       DΨi exp(−L(Ψi )) ·                e
                                               Tr P exp A.                          (3.14)
                                                     i        Ci

I will leave it to the interested reader to verify that up to terms of the form {Q, . . .},
the coupling to gauge fields in (3.14) depends only on the holomorphic structure

                                            19
of E (i.e., the (0, 1) part of A), not on the (1, 0) part of A. This is in accord with
the fact that, as we will see in §4, the B model has for its classical solutions in
space-time the holomorphic vector bundles. As always, the classical solutions are
the objects to which the world-sheet theories can be coupled.


 3.3. Large t Limit


    To set up the Hamiltonian version of these theories, for open strings, we take
Σ to be an infinite strip 0 ≤ σ ≤ π, −∞ ≤ τ ≤ ∞ with metric ds2 = dσ 2 + dτ 2 .
We consider the A and B models with the boundary conditions just described. In
the case of the A model, we use the same Lagrangian submanifold M at the two
ends of the strip. A quantum Hilbert space H is introduced in the usual way by
quantizing on the initial value surface τ = 0. We want to compute the cohomology
of Q and certain aspects of the large t behavior that will be essential in the next
section.


The A Model

    If we write ψ = ψσ dσ + ψτ dτ , then, as the self-duality condition determines ψσ
in terms of ψτ , we can regard χ and ψτ as the independent fermi variables. The
canonical commutation relations are

                                            
                            dφI                   i
                                (σ), φ (σ ) = − g IJ δ(σ − σ ′ )
                                      J ′
                            dτ                    t                            (3.15)
                                                1
                             {ψτ (σ), χ(σ ′ )} = δ(σ − σ ′ ).
                                                t


The Hilbert space H consists of functionals A(Φ, . . .) where now Φ is a map of the
interval I = [0, π] to X mapping ∂I to M, and “. . .” is a subset of half the fermi
variables, depending on a choice of representation of the canonical anticommuta-
tors.

                                            20
    The Hamiltonian is
                                          Zπ
                                  L0 =         dσ T00 .                      (3.16)
                                          0

Using the canonical commutation relations to write dφ/dτ in terms of δ/δφ, this
can be written

           Zπ                                  
       1        1 IJ      δ2            dφI dφJ
  L0 =         − g               + tgIJ           + terms with fermions.     (3.17)
       2        t    δφI δφJ (σ)        dσ dσ
           0


The fundamental relation Tαβ = {Q, bαβ } implies that if we introduce the zero
mode of the b field,
                                          Zπ
                                   b0 =        dσ b00                        (3.18)
                                          0

then

                                    L0 = {Q, b0 }.                           (3.19)


    (3.19) implies that the Q cohomology can be computed in the subspace of
H annihilated by L0 . Since the Q cohomology (and everything else of essential
interest) is independent of t, it is enough to study the kernel of L0 for large t.
Actually, with other applications in mind, we want to understand not just the
kernel of L0 but all eigenvalues that are of order 1/t for large t.

    Looking at (3.17), we see that such eigenfunctions must be localized near the
region with dφI /dσ = 0, that is, the space of constant maps Φ : I → X. Because
of the boundary condition that ∂Σ is mapped to M, the constant map in question
must in fact map I to M. The non-zero modes of the fermions make contributions
of order 1 to L0 . Combining these observations, the low-lying eigenfunctions of L0
can be described by a functional A of the bose and fermi zero modes, with other
modes in their Fock vacuum. (One must check that the energy of this Fock vacuum
is zero, but this follows from Q-invariance or better from the supersymmetry of the

                                              21
untwisted theory.) The bose and fermi zero modes are all tangent to M; denote
them as q a , χa , ψτ a , a = 1 . . . 3, with q a being coordinates on M. (We reserve the
letter φ for coordinates on X.) The canonical commutation relations (3.15) show
that ψτ a can be represented as ∂/∂χa ; then A reduces to a function A(q a , χa ).
This has an expansion in powers of χa

                       A = c(q) + χa Aa (q) + χa χb Bab (q) + . . .                   (3.20)

in which the successive terms can be interpreted as p-forms on M of degrees 0 ≤
p ≤ 3. If Chan-Paton factors are included in the discussion, these differential forms
take values in End(E), the endomorphisms of some flat vector bundle E over M.

    The commutation relations [Q, φI ] = −χI , {Q, χJ } = 0 show that, if we in-
terpret χI as −dφI , we can identify Q with the exterior derivative d on M (with
values in End(E)). The Q cohomology is thus H ∗ (M, End(E)).

    Moreover, (3.17) shows that acting on differential forms on M, L0 reduces to
                                                  π
                                          L0 =       ∆,                               (3.21)
                                                  2t
with ∆ = dd∗ + d∗ d the usual Laplacian on forms. The underlying relation L0 =
{Q, b0 } leads one to guess that in the same approximation
                                                  π ∗
                                           b0 =      d ,                              (3.22)
                                                  2t
and this can be verified using the commutation relations.

The B Model

    For the B model we can be brief, as the arguments are so similar. In the large
t limit, the wave-functional A reduces to a function of the zero modes of φI and
η i (the zero mode of ρ being represented as ∂/∂η). Expanding

                 A(φI , η i ) = c(φI ) + η i Ai (φI ) + η i η j Bij (φI ) + . . . ,   (3.23)

we see that for the low-lying states, A reduces to a sum of (0, q) forms on X
(valued in End(E), E being a holomorphic vector bundle on X), for 0 ≤ q ≤ 3.

                                                22
The commutation relations [Q, φi ] = 0, [Q, φi ] = −η i , {Q, η i } = 0 show that, if
we interpret η i as −dφi , we can identify Q with the ∂ operator (with values in
End(E)). So the cohomology of Q is H 0,∗ (X, End(E)). Likewise, by arguments
similar to those for the A model, L0 and b0 reduce to

                                    π  ∗   ∗
                                               
                                L0 =   ∂∂ +∂ ∂
                                    2t                                           (3.24)
                                    π ∗
                                b0 = ∂ .
                                    2t



         4. Space-Time Interpretation Via String Field Theory

    In this section we will determine the space-time interpretation of the models
just constructed in the case of open strings, that is in the case of orientable world-
sheets with boundary. The reason for focussing on this case is that a simple and
beautiful answer will arise, as we will see. The more perplexing closed string case
(Riemann surfaces without boundary) is the subject of §5.

    Usually, closed strings are inescapable even when one tries to do open string
physics, for elementary topological reasons. The reader may therefore be surprised
at the lengthy discussion of open strings in this section ignoring closed strings. In
fact, as we discuss in §4.2, our main points can be formulated at the classical level,
where closed strings cannot appear; also, we argue in §5 that in these topological
theories, the open and closed strings are decoupled.

    The simplicity of the open string topological theories is closely related to the
comparative simplicity of open string field theory [14], which in turn is intimately
tied up [15] with the existence of a simple cell decomposition of the moduli space
of Riemann surfaces with boundary [11–13]. This cell decomposition involves the
construction of Riemann surfaces by gluing together flat strips Si of width π and
length Ti ; they are glued, as sketched in figure (2), at vertices that generically (un-
less some Ti = 0) are trivalent. The resulting pictures have been called “fatgraphs”

                                          23
                 (a)                                             (b)




    Fig. 3. The multiplication law (a) and integration law (b) of open string
    field theory are defined by pictures involving gluing of strings.

by Penner. In the limit when the Ti are all large, or equivalently when the widths
of the strips can be neglected, the fatgraphs of the open-string field theory reduce
to ordinary graphs corresponding to Feynman diagrams of ordinary field theory.

Construction Of Open String Field Theory

    We recall now the highlights of the construction of open string field theory. A
key part of the structure is a ZZ-graded associative algebra B, with a multiplication
law that we denote as ⋆, and a derivation Q of degree 1 with Q2 = 0. The degree is
                              ⋆                            R
usually called ghost number. There is a linear functional : B → I C, of degree −3
                                                                R
(that is, if b is an element of B of definite ghost number, then b vanishes unless
                                      R                     R     R
b has ghost number three), obeying a ⋆ b = (−1)deg a deg b b ⋆ a, Qb = 0, for all
a, b ∈ B. The string field is a ghost number 1 element A ∈ B. The Lagrangian is
                                Z                      
                              1               2
                        L=          A ⋆ QA + A ⋆ A ⋆ A .                   (4.1)
                              2               3

This is invariant under gauge transformations generated by

                               δA = Qǫ − ǫ ⋆ A + A ⋆ ǫ.                                (4.2)


    Chan-Paton factors are introduced as follows (in the case of a trivial rank N
bundle in space-time with flat connection; the generalization is discussed presently).

  ⋆ The ghost number as I will count it here is the ghost number as defined in [14] plus 3/2;
    thus, the SL(2, IR) invariant vacuum has ghost number zero.

                                            24
Let MN ( IC) be the associative algebra of N × N complex matrices. One simply
                                 R    R
replaces B with B⊗MN ( IC) (and by ⊗ Tr, Tr being the usual trace on MN ( I
                                                                         C)).
This preserves the basic structures. In this process, A acquires matrix indices. If a
suitable reality condition is imposed, A takes values in N × N hermitian matrices
– the Lie algebra of U(N).

    Conventionally, B is taken to be the space of open string states in some critical
                                                                    R
string theory; the multiplication and integration operations ⋆ and are defined by
operations of gluing strings that we recall in figure (3). Q is the BRST operator
of the critical string theory. The integration law is of ghost number −3 since the
Euler characteristic of a disc is −1, and in critical string theory the ghost number
of the vacuum is −3χ(Σ).

    Now we want to consider open string field theory with the conventional string
models replaced by the more exotic ones discussed in §2-3. In particular, for the
world-sheet theory we take a topological sigma model with a Calabi-Yau target
space X of complex dimension three; this ensures the correct ghost number of the
vacuum – or of the integration law. Multiplication and integration are defined by
the standard gluing operations; Q will now be the BRST operator of whatever
topological field theory we consider. This framework enables us to construct an
open-string field theory from any world-sheet theory (obeying the usual axioms).
For instance, instead of tensoring with MN ( I
                                            C) to introduce trivial Chan-Paton
factors, we can use the world-sheet theories with boundary interactions constructed
in §3.2 to couple to a flat bundle on M in the case of the A model, or a holomorphic
bundle on X in the case of the B model.


 4.1. The A Model

    We want to understand the physical content of these models. First we consider
the A model. It is necessary to pick boundary conditions, and as in §3 we follow
Floer and pick boundary conditions associated with Lagrangian submanifolds of
X. In §3, in studying a particular surface Σ, we introduced a separate Lagrangian

                                         25
submanifold Mi for each boundary component Ci of Σ. In string field theory, one
generates all possible Σ’s via a Feynman diagram expansion, and the Mi ’s must be
built in universally at the outset. We will do this in the simplest way by picking a
single M once and for all. Thus the free boundaries of all our strings and surfaces
will be mapped to M ⊂ X. (Generalizations exist; by correlating the choice of M
with the Chan-Paton factors one could make a gauge invariant string field theory
with more than one M.)

   Since X is of complex dimension three, M is a three-manifold. A neighborhood
of M in X is equivalent topologically and even symplectically to a neighborhood of
M in its cotangent bundle T ∗ M. The topological string theory with target space
X involves, roughly, two ingredients. One is the instantons with target X (and
boundary values in M); these are the usual subjects of study in Floer theory. The
other side of the story, as we will see, involves Chern-Simons theory with target
space M. I want first to isolate this “new” ingredient – new in the sense that it is
not usually coupled with Floer theory. The instantons can be suppressed and the
new ingredient isolated by replacing X by T ∗ M, since a simple vanishing theorem
(discussed presently) shows that there are no non-constant instantons mapping
Σ to T ∗ M. Later we will generalize to arbitrary X and determine the instanton
corrections to the space-time Chern-Simons theory.

   So until further notice, in discussing the A model, our target space will be
                                                                     ⋆
the cotangent bundle T ∗ M of an oriented three-manifold M. Like any symplectic
manifold, T ∗ M can be given an almost complex structure such that the symplectic
structure is positive and of type (1, 1); indeed, this is essential in Floer/Gromov
theory of symplectic manifolds. This is good enough for formulating the A model
with target space T ∗ M; though the transformation laws and Lagrangian of the A
model were written in §3 in a way that assumed the integrability of the almost
complex structure, this assumption can be relaxed, as explained in detail in [1].


  ⋆ The orientation is needed to consistently define the sign of the fermion determinant in the
    world-sheet theory of §3.

                                             26
The Vanishing Theorem

    Now let us briefly explain the vanishing theorem, which asserts that instantons
mapping Σ to T ∗ M and mapping ∂Σ to M are necessarily constant.

    Consider temporarily a general symplectic manifold X with symplectic form
ω and an almost complex structure J such that ω is of type (1, 1) and positive.
Positivity means that the metric gIK = J S I ωSK is positive definite; the (1, 1)
condition means that if i, j, k and i, j, k are indices of types (1, 0) and (0, 1), re-
spectively, then gij = gij = 0, and gij = gji = −iωij . If Σ is a Riemann surface, an
instanton or almost holomorphic map is a map Φ : Σ → X with ∂φ      ¯ i = 0. Consider
the bosonic sigma model action

                                   Z
                            I =i       dz ∧ dz gIJ ∂z φI ∂z φJ .                          (4.3)
                                   Σ


Instantons minimize this action for a given homotopy class since

          Z                                Z                                         
                             i
  I =2i                            j
              dz ∧ dz gij ∂z φ ∂z φ − i         dz ∧ dz gij ∂z φi ∂z φj − ∂z φj ∂z φi
          Σ
          Z                             ZΣ                                                (4.4)
                             i     j            ∗
    =2i       dz ∧ dz gij ∂z φ ∂z φ +          Φ (ω).
          Σ                             Σ


The first term on the right hand on the right hand side of (4.4) is positive semi-
definite and vanishes precisely for instantons; so for instantons, the action reduces
        R
to I = Σ Φ∗ (ω). The vanishing theorem comes by showing that if X = T ∗ M, and
Φ(∂Σ) ⊂ M, then
                                       Z
                                            Φ∗ (ω) = 0.                                   (4.5)
                                       Σ


If this is known, then I vanishes for instantons that map ∂Σ to M; but from the
definition (4.3) it is clear that I vanishes only for constant maps.

                                                 27
    To justify (4.4), pick on M local coordinates q a , a = 1 . . . 3. The symplectic
                                        P
structure of T ∗ M can be written as ω = 3a=1 dpa ∧dq a , with pa linear coordinates
                                                               P
in the fibers that vanish on M. This is ω = dρ, where ρ =           pa dq a vanishes on
        R           R
M. So Σ Φ∗ (ω) = ∂Σ Φ∗ (ρ) = 0, if Φ(∂Σ) ⊂ M.

Low Energy Expansion

    As explained following equation (3.3), the key simplification of the A model
is that the essential physics is independent of the coupling parameter t. As t and
the target space metric gIJ appear only in the combination tgIJ , large t is simply
the limit in which the target space metric is scaled up; it is the limit of large
distances or long wavelengths. This is the limit in which ordinary string theory
reduces approximately to field theory. Since ordinary string theory is t-dependent,
the large t behavior is only an approximation. The topological string theories that
we are studying are t-independent, so one can hope for an exact description by
looking at the large t behavior.

    We have analyzed the large t behavior of the string states in §3.3. In particular,
as we saw there, the low-lying modes can be described as functions A(q a , χb ) of
the center of mass variables. In §3.3, we computed the cohomology for all ghost
numbers, but in the string field theory context, we want to insist that that A have
ghost number 1. This means that it must be linear in χ, so we write

                                    A = χa Aa (q),                               (4.6)

with Aa dq a a one-form on M, valued possibly in End(E), the endomorphisms of a
flat vector bundle E.

    In §3.3, we identified Q, in the same large t limit, with the exterior derivative
                                                              R
d. Then the quadratic part of the string field Lagrangian 12 A ⋆ QA reduces (for
the low-lying modes in the large t limit) to
                                       Z
                                   1
                                           Tr A ∧ dA,                            (4.7)
                                   2
                                       M


                                            28
                                            ∞


                                      0              1




     Fig. 4. The coupling of three gauge fields on a disc.

with Tr a trace on the Chan-Paton factors. This is the quadratic part of the
ordinary Chern-Simons action for a gauge field A.

     What about the cubic part of the string field action? If A(j) is a mode of
                                                                              (j)
the gauge field A, the corresponding vertex operator is V (j) = χa Aa (q). Let
us evaluate by world-sheet path integrals the coupling of three such modes on
the disc. This is done by inserting three vertex operators V (i) , i = 1 . . . 3 at
boundary points of the disc, as in figure (4). Because of SL(2, IR) symmetry,
all that matters in the choice of the three points is the cyclic order. So we can
take hV (1) (0)V (2) (1)V (3) (∞)i. In the large t limit, the path integral reduces to an
integral over the constant zero modes; this integral gives
Z                                                                 Z
                                    (1)       (2)       (3)
      1       3   1       3
    dq . . . dq dχ . . . dχ   Tr χ Aa (q) χb Ab (q) χc Ac (q) =
                                 a
                                                                      Tr A(1) ∧A(2) ∧A(3)
                                                                  M
                                                                                    (4.8)
This is simply a matrix element of the cubic part of the usual Chern-Simons action.
So putting the pieces together, the string field action (4.1) reduces to the ordinary
Chern-Simons Lagrangian
                                  Z                       
                             1                   2
                        LT =          Tr A ∧ dA + A ∧ A ∧ A .                       (4.9)
                             2                   3
                                 M


The string field gauge invariances can similarly be seen in the same approximation
to reduce to conventional gauge invariance. So, under the conditions that we have
formulated, the abstract Chern-Simons Lagrangian of string field theory reduces
to the ordinary Chern-Simons Lagrangian.

                                            29
    Now usually, string theories reduce to field theories at low energy only approxi-
mately. For instance, ordinary string theories reduce approximately at low energies
to general relativity plus massless matter fields, but there are O(α′ ) corrections.

    In the case of topological string theories (such as the A model considered
here) the situation is quite different. The analog of the usual O(α′ ) corrections
would be perturbative corrections in 1/t. These are absent, because the model
is t-independent. Instanton corrections are also absent, because for target space
T ∗ M, there are no non-constant instantons, as we have seen. So the reduction of
the A model to (4.9) is exact. If we replace T ∗ M by some Calabi-Yau threefold
X (having M as a Lagrangian subspace), there are instanton corrections to (4.9)
that we will discuss later.

 4.2. Reconsideration From The Hamiltonian Point Of View

    Now I want to reconcile what we have said above with previous discussions of
the A model such as [6] (or [1,§4.1] where the coupling to topological gravity is
considered).

    Formally, the A model is a quantum field theory that counts holomorphic
curves obeying various conditions. (This is familiar in applications of the A model
to mirror symmetry, for instance.) However, in the vanishing theorem that we have
discussed above, we have seen that for target space T ∗ M, there are no non-constant
instantons. How therefore can the model possibly be non-trivial, and in particular
equivalent as we have claimed to perturbative Chern-Simons gauge theory?

    To answer this question, it is necessary to recall some background. Formally,
in topological quantum field theories of this general nature (“cohomological field
theories”), one has an infinite dimensional function space S, and over it an infinite
dimensional vector bundle W; one wishes to make sense of the Euler class of this
bundle. To tame the situation, one has a section w of W. In finite dimensions, if S
is compact and without boundary, the Euler class of W would be Poincaré dual to a
homology class [w] supported on the zeros of w. The Euler class of W, integrated

                                         30
over S, can be represented by various integral formulas; one can construct an
integral formula which is localized near the zeros of w [22]. The Feynman path
integral of a cohomological field theory is a function space version of such a formula.
This point of view is developed (in an analogous four dimensional gauge theory)
in [23].

    To identify S, W, and w in the case at hand, let Σ be a compact oriented
two dimensional surface, perhaps with boundary, not endowed with any a priori
complex structure. Let X be a symplectic manifold, with an almost complex
structure obeying the usual conditions, and with a Lagrangian submanifold M.
Fix a homotopy class H of maps of Φ : Σ → X with Φ(∂Σ) ⊂ M. Such a map can
be described locally by complex functions φi on Σ (corresponding to local complex
coordinates on X). Then we set S to be the space of pairs (J, Φ), where J is a
complex structure on Σ, and Φ is a map Σ → X in the class H, with two such pairs
considered equivalent if they differ by a diffeomorphism of Σ. For W we take the
vector bundle over S whose fiber is the space of sections of Ω0,1 (Σ) ⊗ Φ∗ (T 1,0 X),
where Ω0,1 (Σ) is the space of (0, 1)-forms on Σ in the complex structure J, and
T 1,0 X is the holomorphic tangent bundle of X. For w, we pick a natural section
of W given by the equation for an almost holomorphic curve; it can be written
w = ∂ J φi , with ∂ J the ∂ operator on Σ determined by J.

    Now, let us focus on the case X = T ∗ M, endowed with an almost complex
structure of the usual type and so in particular with a metric. The vanishing
theorem discussed earlier implies that for H a non-trivial homotopy class, there
are no instantons; w has no zeros. If S were compact, we would conclude that the
Euler class of W is zero.

    However, S is non-compact, and its non-compactness is essential. In fact, in a
certain sense, there are instantons or zeros of w at infinity. These arise in a limit in
which the Riemann surface degenerates to a graph Γ. This possibility is sketched
in figure (5); from the point of view of open-string field theory, the degeneration
arises in the limit in which all Ti go to infinity in figure (2).

                                           31
    Fig. 5. Degeneration of a three-holed sphere to a trivalent graph can occur
    in two ways.


    In a given homotopy class of maps of the graph Γ to X, there will be a map
Φ for which Φ(Γ) is a “geodesic graph” of least total length. Φ can be regarded
as a limit of maps from almost degenerate Riemann surfaces (obtained by slight
thickening of Γ) that almost obey the instanton equation. It is an “instanton at
infinity.” The sigma model action (4.3) (which should vanish for instantons obeying
our boundary conditions, as we saw in the proof of the vanishing theorem) vanishes
in the limit of such a geodesic graph.

    The existence of zeros at infinity means that there is no straightforward eval-
uation of the world-sheet path integral by counting zeros of w. There are no real
zeros, but there are virtual zeros at infinity. While the contributions of real zeros
are integers that can be counted topologically, there is no apparent reason for this
to be true for the virtual zeros at infinity. In any event, the contributions of the
virtual zeros, summed over all homotopy classes, can be evaluated by computing
the measure on the moduli space (of complex structures on Σ) that comes from
                                  ⋆
the world-sheet path integral.


  ⋆ When π1 (M ) has infinitely many conjugacy classes, so that the number of homotopy classes
    is infinite, it is scarcely plausible that the full answer can be written as a sum over homotopy
    classes with each class contributing an integer. For convergence, the contributions would
    have to be almost all zero. The possible noncommutativity of the sum over homotopy
    classes and the integration over moduli space may also mean that the final answer (which
    should be obtained by summing over homotopy classes first) cannot be written as a sum of
    contributions of homotopy classes, though the measure on moduli space can be so written.
    In this case, the question of whether the individual contributions are integers does not even
    make sense. This seems to be the case for the one loop contributions, as one can see by
    comparing to D. Fried’s formulas expressing the logarithm of analytic torsion as a sum over
    geodesics [24].

                                                32
                                         T

                        π


   Fig. 6. A strip S of width π with one real modulus T .


   The essential simplification of the A model always arises because for large
t, this measure is concentrated near zeros of w. In the case that the only zeros
are virtual zeros at infinity, the measure is concentrated for large t on the region
near infinity; but this is the limit in which string theory reduces to field theory,
and world-sheet path integrals reduce to Feynman graphs. So the non-vanishing
contributions to the world-sheet path integral come entirely from the regions in
the moduli space (of complex structures on Σ) in which the string theory reduces
to the evaluation of Feynman graphs. This is the equivalence of the string theory
to a field theory that was claimed earlier. Of course, one must remember that (as
in the figure, where there are two possible degenerations) one Riemann surface will
in general be capable of degenerating to several possible Feynman graphs.

Perturbation Theory

   To make this a little more explicit, we will now discuss how to extract the field
theoretic Feynman rules from the string theory.

   We want to describe the measure on the moduli space of Riemann surfaces that
follows from the description of moduli space via fatgraphs. This can be worked
out systematically by quantizing open string field theory. The necessary techniques
were given by Thorn and Boccicchio [25,26] and involve an elegant application of
the Batalin-Vilkovisky approach to quantization. Instead of following that road, I
will merely use the fatgraph description of moduli space and the definition of the
measure in equation (2.4).

   The basic fact that we will use is therefore the fact that every Riemann surface

                                         33
Σ with boundary has a canonical flat metric (with some conical singularities) built
as in figure (2). This metric is obtained by gluing together some standard strips.
The strips are flat rectangles of width π in the σ − τ plane, say 0 ≤ σ ≤ π,
0 ≤ τ ≤ T , with metric ds2 = dσ 2 + dτ 2 . Such a strip, say S (figure (6)), has one
real modulus, namely T . A deformation of this modulus from T to T + δT can be
made by changing the metric to


                              ds2 = dσ 2 + dτ 2 (1 + 2f (τ )) ,                          (4.10)

                                  RT
with f (τ ) any function with        0   dτ f (τ ) = δT . It is convenient to take f (τ ) =
δT · δ(τ − τ0 ), for some τ0 . If one of the δ (k) h in equation (2.4) is the deformation
just described of the length of the strip S, then the corresponding mode b(k) of
equation (2.3) is simply
                                             Zπ
                                   (k)
                                 b       =        dσ b00 (σ, τ0 ).                       (4.11)
                                             0

This is in other words an insertion of the zero mode b0 at τ = τ0 .

    We also have to worry about the propagation of the string through the proper
time T ; this gives a factor of exp(−T L0 ), with L0 the string Hamiltonian discussed
in §3.3. Allowing for the integral over T and the insertion of b0 , we get for each
strip a factor
                                   Z∞
                                         dT b0 exp(−T L0 ).                              (4.12)
                                     0

Let V be the kernel of L0 , and let 1/L0 be the inverse of L0 in the subspace
                                                                     ⋆
orthogonal to V. Since b0 annihilates the kernel of L0 , the integral in (4.12) can

  ⋆ The topological sigma model in question was constructed by twisting an ordinary super-
    symmetric model (as explained in detail in [6]) by a power of the canonical bundle. On
    the flat strip under discussion here, the canonical bundle is naturally trivialized, and the
    twisting does nothing. In the underlying supersymmetric model, b0 is the adjoint of Q, and
    as in Hodge theory, the relation L0 = {Q, b0 } implies that Q and b0 annihilate the kernel
    of L0 .

                                                   34
be evaluated to give
                            Z∞
                                                          1
                                 dT b0 exp(−T L0 ) = b0      .                  (4.13)
                                                          L0
                            0



    In equations (3.21) and (3.22), we determined the large t limits of L0 and b0 to
be π∆/2t and πd∗ /2t. (Thus, b0 vanishes for large t, but b0 /L0 has a non-vanishing
limit because of the small eigenvalues of L0 .) So the large t limit of (4.13) is


                                              1
                                         d∗     .                               (4.14)
                                              ∆


Now, (4.13) is the open string propagator, while (4.14) is the propagator of Chern-
Simons field theory.

    In the fatgraph approach to construction of moduli space, the strips we have
just analyzed are glued together at cubic vertices to make Riemann surfaces. The
structure of the interaction vertices is the same as in the open string multiplication
law, figure (3(a)). We have already seen in connection with figure (4) how these
vertices reduce at large t to wedge products of differential forms, as in Chern-
Simons field theory.

    While the underlying string field A had ghost number 1, and the underlying
Chern-Simons gauge field A is a one-form, in (4.13) and (4.14) states of all ghost
number – or differential forms of all degrees – are propagating. In either case,
the vertices of the gauge fixed theory have in a natural sense the same structure
(gluing of strings or wedge products) as that in the classical theory, though the
constraint on the ghost number or degree is absent. In the case of string theory,
this structure was explained by Thorn and Boccicchio [25,26] by solving the master
equation and gauge fixing of string field theory. In Chern-Simons theory, the
analogous formulation of the gauge fixed theory, combining the fields of different
ghost number, is due to Axelrod and Singer [4].

                                           35
             (a)                                  (b)
                           α (4)                        α (4)                   α (3)




                                          α (3)         α (1)                   α (2)
                   α (1)
                                   α(2)                         α (4)   α (3)




                                                                α (1)   α (2)


    Fig. 7. Coupling of four states α(1) , . . . , α(4) on the boundary of a disc
    (a) with an antighost insertion around α(2) ; the Feynman diagrams corre-
    sponding to the two possible “channels” (b).


The Tree Level S-Matrix

    I would now like to make this more explicit in a particular example. I have
picked the example to anticipate the following question that may perplex some
readers. We have extracted Chern-Simons theory from the open string degenera-
tions of moduli space, but are there additional closed string contributions? It will
be clear in §5 that the role of the closed strings is not fully understood, though I
will argue there that the closed and open strings are decoupled. I therefore want
to demonstrate that the statement “the topological string theory of the A model
is equivalent to Chern-Simons field theory” can be tested in a situation in which
closed strings are definitely not relevant. This is the case for scattering amplitudes
(or the analog of what in ordinary string theory would be scattering amplitudes)
for the case that Σ is a disc.

    As we know from §3.3, the “physical states” of the open string field theory are
elements of H 1 (Σ, End(E)), E being a flat vector bundle that we will keep fixed in

                                                         36
the discussion. The exterior derivative with values in that bundle will be denoted
as d. Let α(1) , . . . , α(4) be four such states. We consider their coupling on the disc
in that cyclic order, as in figure (7). To calculate the four point function in field
theory, all that we really need to know is that there are two possible Feynman
diagrams, indicated in figure (7), and that the propagator is d∗ /∆. The amplitude
is therefore
                             Z                                                      
                                               d∗                        d∗
 I(α(1) , . . . , α(4) ) =       Tr α(1) ∧ α(2) α(3) ∧ α(4) + α(2) ∧ α(3) α(4) ∧ α(1) .
                                               ∆                         ∆
                             M
                                                                                    (4.15)

    To do the same calculation in string theory, we introduce vertex operators
V(i) = α(i) a χa for the external states, and one antighost insertion corresponding to
the one real modulus of the disc. We can map V(1) , V(3) , and V(4) to 0, 1, and ∞,
and take the modulus to be the position of V(2) . In that case, the antighost insertion
can be taken to be a small contour integral around the position of V(2) , as in the
figure. The contour integral can be evaluated by thinking of V(2) as an operator
inserted on the end of an open string in a Hamiltonian formulation; the antighost
contour computes the commutator of this operator with the antighost zero mode
b0 , and so replaces the zero form operator V(2) by its one-form descendant

                                                                    dq a
                                     W(2) = [b0 , V(2) ] = Aa (q)        .          (4.16)
                                                                    dτ

The string theory amplitude is therefore

                         Z1
                                                    dq a
                                 dσhV(1) (0) · Aa        (σ) · V(3) (1)V(4) (∞)i.   (4.17)
                                                    dτ
                             0


Now we wish to evaluate this, as usual, in the limit of t → ∞. If the integral were
limited to a range of σ bounded away from 0 and 1, it would vanish as 1/t for
t → ∞. This is so because the φ and ψ − χ propagators are both proportional
to 1/t. A non-zero result arises only because if the result is blindly expanded in

                                                      37
powers of 1/t, the endpoint contributions are infinite. This is because the term of
                                                                        a
lowest order in 1/t in the operator product V(1) (0) · Aa dq
                                                          dτ (σ) is proportional to
1/σ, coming from φ − ∂φ contractions. A simple-minded 1/t expansion of (4.17),
evaluating those contractions (and discarding a term proportional to {Q, . . .}),
leads to a divergent contribution near σ = 0 that looks like

                      Zǫ
               π             1                     
                           dσ hχa d∗ (α(1) ∧ α(2) ) a (0) V(3) (1) V(4) (∞)i,            (4.18)
               2t            σ
                      0


with ǫ an arbitrary fixed positive number.

    To cure the infinity, we must remember the anomalous dimensions of the var-
ious operators, which are given by the eigenvalues of L0 . To order 1/t, we had
L0 = π∆/2t in §3.3. The physical states have harmonic representatives, and if
we pick such representatives (discarding terms of the form {Q, . . .}), the V(i) have
                                                                         
L0 = 0 in order 1/t. However, the vertex operator χa d∗ (α(1) ∧ α(2) ) a in (4.18)
corresponds to a state not annihilated by L0 . Including powers of σ coming from
the anomalous dimensions, and replacing the expectation values h                 i by zero mode
integrals, (4.18) is replaced by

                  Zǫ             Z                                                
             π               1
                          dσ         Tr d∗ (α(1) ∧ α(2) )σ π∆/2t ∧ α(3) ∧ α(4) (∞)       (4.19)
             2t              σ
                  0              M


The endpoint contribution of the σ integral is now finite as t → ∞, and reproduces
one of the two Feynman diagram contributions in equation (4.15). The other arises
from the endpoint at σ = 1.

    Now let us discuss briefly the physical significance of these couplings. Given a
flat bundle E corresponding to a solution A(0) about which one wishes to expand,
the space of linearized deformations is H 1 (M, End(E)). Writing A = A(0) + B,
impose the gauge condition d∗ B = 0 (with d∗ being defined with respect to A(0) ).
                  P            P
In turn, write B = i ui α(i) + σ vσ β(σ) , where α(i) are a basis of zero modes of

                                                    38
the Laplacian ∆ and β(σ) are the non-zero modes; and ui , vσ are real coefficients.
The underlying Lagrangian
                                 Z                       
                                                2
                            L=       Tr A ∧ dA + A ∧ A ∧ A                                     (4.20)
                                                3
                                 M


can be regarded as a function L(ui , vσ ). The tree diagrams that we have discussed
above are a calculational technique for “integrating out” the vσ to get an “effective
potential” V (ui ). It can be written in terms of the n-point functions on the disc
discussed above for n = 4 as

             X ui uj uk                         X ui uj uk ul
 V (ui ) =                hα(i) α(j) α(k) i +                   hα(i) α(j) α(k) α(l) i + . . . . (4.21)
                     3!                                   4!
             i,j,k                              i,j,k,l


Since V is obtained from the underlying Lagrangian L by “integrating out the
massive modes,” its stationary points, i.e., solutions of ∂V /∂ui = 0, are in one-to-
one correspondence with the stationary points of the underlying Lagrangian.

    The process of “integrating out the massive modes” can be described as follows.
Let L be a function with a critical point at the origin, and let n be the dimension
of the kernel of the Hessian or matrix of second derivatives of L. Then by a
generalization of the Morse lemma, it is possible to pick coordinates ui , i = 1 . . . n
and vσ in a neighborhood of the origin so that

                                                          X
                               L(ui , vσ ) = V (ui ) +         aσ vσ 2 ,                       (4.22)
                                                           σ


with non-zero constants aσ ; V (ui ) is then the “effective potential with massive
modes integrated out.” The ui are of course only uniquely determined up to diffeo-
morphism. Describing the possible canonical forms of V (ui) up to a reparametriza-
tion of the variables is more or less the problem of singularity theory.

    Since the ui can be described in first order as coordinates near the origin on
the naturally defined vector space H 1 (M, End(E)), it is natural to think of the

                                                    39
effective potential V as a function defined on that space, and as such it is uniquely
defined up to a coordinate transformation


                                  ui → u
                                       ei = ui + cijk uj uk + . . .                             (4.23)


that is trivial in first order. The quartic coupling hα(i) α(j) α(k) α(l) i, for particular
values of i, j, k, and l, is invariant under such transformations if and only if the
cubic coupling hα(m) α(n) α(p) i vanishes for m, n equal to two consecutive values
                 ⋆
of i, j, k, l;       by Poincaré duality, this is so precisely if α(m) ∧ α(n) vanishes in
H 2 (M, End(E)) whenever m and n equal two consecutive values of i, j, k, and l.

     Under such conditions, the four point coupling can be given the following
interpretation. Since α(i) ∧ α(j) and α(j) ∧ α(k) vanish in cohomology, there are
End(E)-valued one-forms y, z with


                              dy = α(i) ∧ α(j) , dz = α(j) ∧ α(k) .                             (4.24)


In fact, we can set
                                             1             
                                      y = d∗   α(i) ∧ α(j)
                                             ∆                                                  (4.25)
                                             1             
                                      z = d∗   α(j) ∧ α(k) .
                                             ∆

(Because 1/∆ is the inverse of ∆ only in the orthocomplement of the kernel of ∆,
in proving that (4.25) obeys (4.24) one needs the fact that α(i) ∧α(j) and α(j) ∧α(k)
vanish in cohomology and so are orthogonal to the kernel.) Let


                             w(α(i) , α(j) , α(k) ) = y ∧ α(k) + α(i) ∧ z.                      (4.26)


Then dw = 0, so w determines an element of H 2 (M, End(E)). Considering how
w transforms under a shift in y and z, one sees that it is not well-defined as an

   ⋆ One considers i, j, k, l arranged on a circle in that order, so l and i are consecutive.

                                                  40
element of H 2 (M, End(E)) but only as an element of the quotient group


     H 2 (M, End(E))/(H 1 (M, End(E)) ∧ α(l) ⊕ α(i) ∧ H 1 (M, End(E))).           (4.27)


The element w of that quotient space is known as the Massey triple product of
α(i) , α(j) , and α(k) . Under the further hypothesis that α(k) ∧ α(l) and α(l) ∧ α(i)
vanish in cohomology,
                                Z
                                    Tr w(α(i) , α(j) , α(k) ) ∧ α(l)              (4.28)
                                M

is well-defined and in fact equals coefficient of the quartic term in the effective
potential as computed above. The contribution of the quartic coupling to ∂V /∂ul
is therefore
                                         Z
                     1 X
                         ui uj uk            Tr w(α(i) , α(j) , α(k) ) · α(l) .   (4.29)
                     3!
                        i,j,k           M

As a flat connection is a critical point of the Chern-Simons action, this is in keep-
ing with the observation [27] that the Massey triple product and its higher order
analogs are the obstructions to deformation of a flat connection.

 4.3. Comparison To Remarks Of Kontsevich

    What do we learn by interpreting Chern-Simons gauge theory as a string the-
ory? Here I will only point out one obvious consequence. Other applications may
involve, for instance, a deeper relation of Chern-Simons theory to mirror manifolds.

    The fact that Chern-Simons theory can be interpreted as a topological sigma
model coupled to topological gravity means that one can introduce the usual ob-
servables of topological gravity – the stable cohomology classes on the moduli space
of Riemann surfaces introduced by Mumford, Morita, and Miller. In the present
context, this would amount to the following. As was sketched in §2, the topological
sigma model determines a differential form Θ on moduli space; for open strings,
the relevant moduli space is the moduli space Mg,s,h of Riemann surfaces of genus

                                                 41
g with s punctures (where vertex operators are inserted) and h boundary compo-
nents. Instead of integrating the closed form Θ over Mg,s,h, we can integrate it
over a homology cycle C in Mg,s,h of codimension, say, n.

    The trouble is that we have fixed X to have complex dimension three precisely
to ensure that Θ is a top form. It therefore cannot be integrated over a cycle of
positive codimension unless the definition is modified somehow. The following way
of doing this will enable us to make contact with observations by Kontsevich.

    Instead of considering a single target space X with a fixed metric, we will
consider a family of X’s with a family of metrics. The partition function of the
theory will be not a number but a closed differential form on the space of metrics
on X. To implement this idea, introduce along with the metric gIJ (φ) of X a
fermionic variable ζIJ (φ) (of ghost number one) which one can think of as (up to
a constant) the exterior derivative of gIJ (φ). Take the new transformation laws


                             δgIJ = iαζIJ , δζIJ = 0.                         (4.30)


Recalculating the Lagrangian starting from (3.2), we find that (3.3) is replaced by
e = L + L′ , with
L
                             Z                           
                     L = −t d2 zζij ψzi ∂z̄ φj + ∂z φi ψzj .
                       ′
                                                                              (4.31)
                               Σ


    Since L′ is of ghost number −1 in the “matter fields” φ, χ, ψ, every insertion
of L′ shifts the ghost number by one unit. If we want to integrate not over moduli
space but over a cycle C of codimension n, the non-vanishing contributions will
be precisely nth order in L′ . As L′ is linear in ζIJ , these contributions will be
nth order in ζIJ and so will define an n-form Ω on the space R of metrics on X.
Q-invariance means that Ω is closed. Let F be the group of diffeomorphisms of X.
Ω is invariant under the natural action of F on R and moreover is basic (to show
the later one notes that if ζIJ = DI vJ + DJ vI for some v I , then L′ is of the form

                                         42
{Q, . . .} up to terms that vanish by the equations of motion). So if one has a fiber
bundle
                                    X    →    Y
                                              ↓                               (4.32)
                                              B,

with an arbitrary base B, then by picking a metric on the total space Y one gets
a family of metrics on X, parametrized by B, and Ω determines an n-dimensional
cohomology class of B.

    We have found, therefore, a map from the codimension n homology of Mg,s,h to
the n-dimensional cohomology of B. This map was described by Kontsevich [5] by
examining Chern-Simons perturbation theory. The considerations just explained
give a more conceptual explanation for its existence.

A Digression

    Let us now make a small digression to examine some related observations by
Kontsevich in the light of standard quantum field theory ideas. We want to con-
sider the standard Fadde’ev-Popov-BRST quantization of three dimensional Chern-
Simons gauge theory, with gauge group G, on a three-manifold M. In doing so, in
addition to the gauge field Aa , one introduces a ghost field c (anticommuting, of
ghost number one, transforming in the adjoint representation). The usual BRST
transformation laws are
                                   δAa = −Da c
                                         1                                    (4.33)
                                    δc = [c, c].
                                         2

We temporarily postpone introducing the antighosts and auxiliary fields that enter
the gauge fixing.

    Just from the A − c system, it is possible to construct new observables (dis-
cussed, for instance, in [28], where more information can be found). Let T be an
invariant, antisymmetric polynomial on the Lie algebra G of G. If P ∈ M is any

                                         43
point, let

                                  (0)
                                OT (P ) = T (c(P )).                          (4.34)


It is evident that O(0) is BRST invariant and cannot be written in the form δ(. . .).
By solving the “descent equations”


                                   dO(0) = δO(1)
                                        (1)
                                   dOT = δO(2)
                                        (2)
                                                                              (4.35)
                                   dOT = δO(3)
                                        (3)
                                   dOT = 0,


                                                                      (i)
one finds for each i, 0 ≤ i ≤ 3, an operator-valued i-form OT that is BRST
invariant up to δ(. . .). Hence, if Y ⊂ M is a i-dimensional cycle, then

                                        Z
                                                   (i)
                                              OT                              (4.36)
                                        Y



is BRST invariant (and is easily seen, by virture of (4.35), to depend only on the
homology class of Y ). In particular, setting i = 3 and Y = M, we get new terms
that can be added to the Chern-Simons Lagrangian. To be precise, if L is the
usual Chern-Simons Lagrangian and Tα are the antisymmetric invariants on the
Lie algebra, we can take

                                        X          Z
                                                               (3)
                           L→L+               tα         d3 x OTα .           (4.37)
                                        α
                                                   M



This modification of the standard Chern-Simons theory is implicit in the work of
Kontsevich, who describes the situation in terms of a certain class of homotopy
Lie algebras.

                                              44
    One could also, as in Donaldson theory, pick closed submanifolds Mα of M, of
dimension dα , and generalize (4.37) to
                                      X          Z
                                                            (d )
                           L→L+             tα       d3 x OTαα .              (4.38)
                                       α
                                                Mα


    As it stands, (4.37) is not very useful. Since the usual Chern-Simons theory
conserves ghost number, and the O(3) ’s all have ghost number +3, the results will
be independent of the tα unless we also introduce some interaction of negative
ghost number. To get something interesting, we will now modify the usual gauge
fixing.

    Gauge fixing requires the introduction of antighost and auxiliary fields. The
standard procedure is to introduce the antighost c (anticommuting, of ghost num-
ber −1, in the adjoint representation) and the auxiliary field w (commuting, of
ghost number 0, in the adjoint representation), with

                                δc = iw,          δw = 0.                     (4.39)

Gauge fixing is then carried out by

                                     L → L + δΓ,                              (4.40)

with any convenient Γ. A standard choice involves picking a metric gab on M.
Writing also A = A(0) + B, where A(0) is a solution of the classical equations about
which one wishes to expand, and denoting the covariant derivative with respect to
A(0) as D (0) , we take
                                 Z
                                            √               (0)
                          Γ=−        d3 x       gg ab Tr cDa Bb .             (4.41)
                                M

Computing δΓ, one gets the usual gauge fixing Lagrangian
                        Z                               
                              √            (0)       (0)
                LGF = d3 x g Tr iwDb B b − cDb D b c .                        (4.42)
                          M

    Just as in our field theoretic discussion, to modify this, we will consider not a

                                            45
fixed target M but a family of M’s with a variable metric. Instead of considering
the metric gab of M to be “inert” under the BRST transformations, we introduce
corresponding fermi variables ζab (of ghost number 1), with


                                δgab = ζab ,         δζab = 0.               (4.43)


                           eGF = LGF + ∆LGF with
Then (4.42) is replaced by L

                            Z                          
                                  3    √      ab 1 ab c     (0)
                ∆LGF = −         d x       g ζ − g ζ c Tr cDa Bb .           (4.44)
                                                 2
                            M


Since ∆LGF is of ghost number −1 in the matter fields, insertions of O(3) ’s can
be balanced by insertions of ∆LGF . As ∆LGF is linear in ζ, the resulting ampli-
tudes, just as in our string theoretic discussion, will be naturally not numbers but
differential forms on the base space of a fibration.


 4.4. General Target Spaces

    So far we have only considered the A model with target space X = T ∗ M. Now
we want to generalize the discussion to consider an arbitrary symplectic target
manifold X (of c1 = 0), with M as a Lagrangian submanifold.

    The first consequence of replacing T ∗ M with a more general X is that there
may be nonconstant instantons. The same argument that we used in proving the
vanishing theorem for T ∗ M shows that a nonconstant instanton would necessarily
have a positive value of the instanton number

                                            Z
                                       q=        Φ∗ (ω).                     (4.45)
                                            Σ


To improve the convergence of our formulas, we pick a positive number θ, and
weight instantons of instanton number q with a factor of exp(−θq). This can be

                                                46
naturally built into the formulas by adding to the Lagrangian a suitable multiple
of q:
                                            Z
                                L→L+θ              Φ∗ (ω).                      (4.46)
                                            Σ

    In the absence of non-constant instantons, the space-time theory of the A
model was ordinary Chern-Simons theory. We want to determine the corrections
to this coming from the non-constant instantons. In doing so, our goal is to find
the classical Lagrangian underlying the space-time physics of the A model. To
this end, we concentrate on the case that the world-sheet is a disc Σ. (However,
corrections due to higher topologies can be described similarly.) The target space
Lagrangian LT is equal to a world-sheet path integral on the disc:
                               Z
                         LT = DX . . . Dψ exp(−L)                               (4.47)

We already know that the contribution to (4.47) of instanton number q = 0 is the
ordinary Chern-Simons action. We want to determine the contribution for some
non-zero value of q.

    Consider the moduli space of holomorphic maps Φ : Σ → X with Φ(∂Σ) ⊂ M
and with two such maps identified if they differ by an SL(2, IR) transformation.
The fact that c1 (X) = 0 and dim C
                                 I (X) = 3 means that in the moduli problem, the
dimensions of the appropriate H 0 and H 1 are zero. “Generically” this means that
there are only finitely many such instantons for each value of q. For simplicity, we
will consider only this case. If Φ is such an instanton, let C = Φ(∂Σ). Generically,
C is a knot in the three-manifold M. Let us work out the contribution of Φ to the
path integral (4.47). If we are expanding around a background connection A in
M, the contribution of the Chan-Paton factors is
                                         Z
                                Tr P exp A.                                     (4.48)
                                               C

Note that though C bounds a disc in X, it may not do so in M, so (4.48) can be non-
trivial even if A is flat. We also get a factor of exp(−θq) from the instanton-counting

                                          47
term in (4.46). The remaining contributions are nearly trivial since (i) they are
independent of t; (ii) they reduce in the large t limit to a ratio of determinants;
(iii) except for a possible sign, the boson and fermion determinants cancel because
of the Q symmetry. The contribution of an instanton is hence
                                                     Z
                              η exp(−θq) Tr P exp        A                     (4.49)
                                                     C


where η = ±1 is the ratio of determinants.

    The total action is therefore easy to evaluate. If Φi , i = 1, 2, 3, . . . are the
instantons of non-zero instanton number, with instanton numbers qi , boundaries
Ci , and determinant factors ηi , then the action is

           Z                        X∞                       Z
       1                  2
  LT =         Tr A ∧ dA + A ∧ A ∧ A +   ηi exp(−θqi ) Tr P exp A. (4.50)
       2                  3
           M                                   i=1                      C



    For instance, for θ >> 0, the factors exp(−θqi ) are small, and the instanton
corrections to amplitudes can be evaluated perturbatively. Their evaluation would
involve calculating expectation values of products of Wilson lines on the three-
manifold M.

 4.5. The B Model

    Now, we would like, in a similar spirit, to identify the space-time field theory
that is equivalent to the B model, with the “free” boundary conditions of §3.1. To
be more precise, we consider the open string sector of the B model, and we use the
same general framework of open string field theory as in §4.1. We can be brief, as
the arguments are so similar.

    As in the case of the A model, the main simplification comes from the invari-
ance under rescaling the metric of the target space X by an arbitrary factor t. In
§3.3, we saw that the low-lying modes of the string are functions A(φI , η i ) of the

                                          48
zero modes. As we now wish A to have ghost number 1, we take it to be linear in
η, so in fact

                                   A = η ī Aī (φI ).                          (4.51)

So the physical field A is a one-form of type (0, 1). If gauge fields are included via
Chan-Paton factors, then A takes values in N × N matrices or more generally in
the endomorphisms of some holomorphic vector bundle E.

    The linearized gauge transformation law δA = Qǫ reduces for large t to δA =
∂ǫ, so A must be interpreted as the (0, 1) part of a connection on E. What should
be the field equation for A? This can be anticipated from the discussion at the
end of §3.2, where we showed that the background connections to which the B
model can be coupled are precisely those for which the (0, 2) part of the curvature
vanishes, in other words those that define holomorphic structures on E. To write
a Lagrangian from which this equation can be derived, let λ be an everywhere
non-zero holomorphic three-form on X. Then up to an undetermined constant,
the Lagrangian whose solutions are connections of vanishing (0, 2) curvature is

                            Z                           
                        1                      2
                   LT =         λ ∧ Tr A ∧ ∂A + A ∧ A ∧ A .                     (4.52)
                        2                      3
                            X


Arguments similar to those that we have given for the A model show that in the
large t limit, the open string field theory of the B model reduces to (4.52).

    The quantum field theory with Lagrangian (4.52) is unrenormalizable by power
counting. However, it has the following all-but-unique property: there are no pos-
sible counterterms that respect the classical symmetries. The symmetries of (4.52)
include complex gauge transformations, ∂ A → g∂ A g −1, with g an arbitrary gauge
transformation of E not respecting any reality or unitarity condition; and local
complex changes of coordinates that preserve λ. There is no local density con-
structed from A that is invariant under these symmetries. (Even LT itself, though
possessing these invariances at least if one considers only gauge transformations

                                           49
                            u

                                                c

    Fig. 8. A cylinder U and an embedded circle C. Any diagram contain-
    ing this embedded cylinder has two moduli naturally associated with the
    cylinder; one is the length of the cylinder and the second comes from the
    possibility of “cutting” the cylinder on C, and twisting about C before
    regluing.


that are connected to the identity, is not the integral of an invariant local density.)
Infinities in quantum field theory are ordinarily integrals of invariant local densi-
ties, so if (4.52) could be quantized preserving the symmetries, one would expect
this theory to be finite, though superficially unrenormalizable.

    Relying only on usual field theory arguments, it is not at all clear that (4.52)
can be quantized preserving its symmetries. However, the equivalence of (4.52) to
a string theory strongly suggests that it in fact is finite. One might worry about
whether closed string poles can ruin the finiteness; at the end of §5 we will argue
that this does not occur. One might also wonder whether the finite theory given by
the string theory is really (4.52) or some more elaborate theory with (4.52) coupled
to closed strings. In §5 we argue that the closed strings are decoupled.



                         5. The Closed String Sector

    We have discovered that – with some reasonable boundary conditions – the
open string sector of the topological A and B string theories has an elegant in-
terpretation in terms of a space-time field theory. The extension to closed strings
does not work so nicely; the first point of this section is to sketch what the problem
is. After doing this, I will conclude by trying to show that open and closed strings
are decoupled in these models; this is intended as partial justification for studying
the open strings separately in §4.

                                          50
    For open strings, the propagator is

                                               b0
                                                  ,                                            (5.1)
                                               L0

with L0 the Hamiltonian of the string and b0 the antighost zero mode. For closed
strings, one has separate zero modes b0 and b0 for right- and left-moving antighosts.
It is convenient to set b±
                         0 = b0 ± b0 . The formula analogous to (5.1) is that the
closed string propagator is
                                      b−
                                       0 b0
                                            +  b0 b0
                                          + Π=       Π.                                        (5.2)
                                       2L0     L+ 0

Here L+
      0 = L0 −L0 is the total string Hamiltonian, and Π is the projection operator
on states invariant under rotation of the circle. This formula is fairly well known,
and in any case can be derived similarly to (5.1), replacing the strip in figure
(6) with the cylinder of figure (8); the extra ghost field in the numerator and
the projection on rotation-invariant states come from the twist symmetry of the
cylinder, indicated in the figure.

    For the A model, for instance, the long wavelength limits of b0 and b0 are the
∂ ∗ and ∂ ∗ operators of the target space X. With L0 reducing at long wavelengths
to the Laplacian ∆, the string propagator looks like

                                              ∂∗∂∗
                                                   .                                           (5.3)
                                               ∆

This propagator, however, does not seem to arise by gauge fixing of any local
Lagrangian. It is a pseudodifferential operator of degree zero, so for it to arise as
the inverse of a differential operator, that operator would have to be of degree zero,
that is a constant.

    In fact, by repeating for the closed string the analysis of §3.3, one finds that
the low energy modes of the closed string sector of the A model are naturally
                                                      ⋆
represented by a two-form h in space-time. (For large t, winding sectors of the

  ⋆ For the B model, one gets instead a sum of (0, i) forms with values in ∧j T (1,0) , with i+j = 2.

                                                51
closed string cannot have small eigenvalues of L0 .) The free Lagrangian for h that
one might guess by analogy with our open string results would be

                                           Z
                                      L=       h ∧ ∂∂h.                           (5.4)
                                           X


This has
                                            ∂∗∂∗
                                                                                  (5.5)
                                             ∆2

for a gauge fixed propagator. The extra factor of ∆ in the denominator, which is
in sharp variance with (5.3), of course, makes (5.5) a pseudodifferential operator
of degree −2, in keeping with the fact that the kinetic operator in (5.4) is second
order.

    What sort of Lagrangian do we get by taking the low energy limit of closed
string field theory? As we discussed in §2 in a related context, the free part of the
closed string Lagrangian is

                                        (Ψ, c−
                                             0 QΨ),                              (5.6)


where ideally

                                      {b0 − , c0 − } = 1.                        (5.7)


Such a c0 − does not exist, since b0 − , whose field theory limit is ∂ ∗ − ∂ ∗ , has
a non-trivial cohomology. However, one can pick a c0 − such that {b0 − , c0 − } =
1 − T , where T is the projection operator onto a subspace (say the kernel of L0 )
annihilated by Q; this is good enough to ensure gauge invariance of (5.7). Such a
c0 − is, in the field theory limit,
                                           ∂−∂
                                               .                                  (5.8)
                                            2∆

With this choice of c0 − , and recalling that the field theory limit of Q is ∂ + ∂, the

                                               52
field theory limit of the Lagrangian is not (5.4) but

                                     Z
                                              1
                                         h∧     ∂∂h.                               (5.9)
                                              ∆
                                    X


When this is gauge-fixed and inverted to get a propagator, the factor of ∆−1
migrates to the numerator, canceling a factor of ∆−1 in (5.5) and reproducing the
field theory limit of the closed string propagator (5.3).

A General Puzzle

    The conclusion seems to be that closed string field theory of the A model –
or similarly of the B model – would be non-local in space-time. Sometimes such
apparent non-localities can be eliminated by introducing additional fields (such
that the apparent non-locality arises in integrating them out). I have no evidence
that that can be done here. In any event, certain puzzling arguments seem to
show that the closed string A and B theories do not behave as one would expect
of space-time field theories.

    In either the A or the B model, there are non-trivial cubic and higher order
couplings of the physical modes. In studying the open string sector of the A model,
there was at the classical level (the world-sheet being a disc) a cubic coupling of
                                                     R
three physical fields given by the classical formula M Tr A ∧ A ∧ A, and various
higher interactions involving Massey products, as we saw in §4.2. As always in field
theory, these couplings are Taylor series coefficients of a natural potential V (ti ) for
sources ti coupling to the physical modes. The classical solutions of the space-
time theory – or equivalently the possible world-sheet theories – are in one-to-one
correspondence with the critical points of V .

    What about the closed string sectors? There are analogous cubic and higher
couplings of physical modes. For instance, for the closed string sector of the A
                                                      R
model, the cubic coupling in the large volume limit is X h∧h∧h. Experience with
both field theory and with the open string sectors of the A and B models lead us to

                                           53
form a generating function V (ti ) from these couplings, with the expectation that
the allowed world-sheet theories will correspond to the critical points of V . This
latter expectation proves to be false. For the A model, for instance, the part of the
h field that is a (1, 1) form in space-time represents a displacement in the Kahler
class of the metric of X. The A model makes sense for any choice of this Kahler
class, so in contrast to what one would have anticipated, having V ′ (ti ) 6= 0 is not
an obstruction to being able to define the world-sheet theory. Likewise, for the
B model, the low energy modes include a displacement in the complex structure
of X. The B model makes sense for any complex structure on X, even though
there are non-zero cubic and higher order couplings for the fields representing a
displacement in the complex structure.


 5.1. Closed String Contributions To Amplitudes

    Leaving this puzzle as food for thought, I will conclude by making some simple
comments about the closed string contributions to open string amplitudes of the
A and B models.

    Let us look briefly at the couplings of open and closed strings in these models.
To do so we will use the fatgraph or open string field theory description of external
open and closed strings. An external open string (a marked point on the boundary
of a Riemann surface) should have one real modulus, while an external closed string
(a marked point in the interior) should have two. In the fatgraph description, as
one might expect, external open strings are represented by open string propagators
going off to infinity, as for O1 and O2 in figure (9(b)). The one real modulus of
the open string is, roughly, the location at which its propagator is attached to the
rest of the figure. The proper coupling of external closed strings (which can be
deduced by seeing how closed string poles arise in open string diagrams, as in [29])
is as follows. One attaches to the open string diagram an external open string
propagator of finite length T , closes it up by folding together its free end, and
inserts the closed string at the resulting conical singularity. The two real moduli

                                         54
                    (a)                       (b)   O1                 O2

                     C


                              T                      T
                                                         3

                                                                       T2
                                                         C1       C2

                                                             T1

    Fig. 9. In the fatgraph description of a Riemann surface coupling open
    and closed strings, the closed strings are incorporated as in (a). A stan-
    dard open string strip of width π and length T , open at one end (where
    it attaches to the rest of the diagram) is closed at the other end by fold-
    ing it over on itself; the closed string is attached at the resulting conical
    singularity, as shown. A typical fatgraph coupling open and closed strings
    is shown in (b). It consists of five flat strips glued on the dotted lines,
    with conical singularities shown as solid dots. The open strings O1 and
    O2 are attached at the ends of infinite flat strips, while the closed strings
    appear as conical singularities on strips of finite lengths T1 and T2 . This
    particular world-sheet has three real moduli: T1 , T2 , and the length T3 of
    the one internal propagator.


of the closed string are, roughly, T and the position at which the propagator is
attached to the rest of the diagram. This is sketched in figures (9(a,b)).

    To compute the classical couplings of n open strings and m closed strings, we
consider the moduli space Dn,m of a disc with n marked points on the boundary
and m in the interior; its real dimension is n+m−3. (The analysis goes through the
same way in higher genus.) Comparing the dimension of Dn,m to that of Dn+m,0 ,
there is one extra modulus for each marked point in the interior. As explained
in the last paragraph, the fatgraph description of Dn,m (figure (9(b))) is similar
to the fatgraph description of Dn+m,0 except that, while the external open strings
are attached to outgoing propagators of infinite length, the external closed strings
are attached to propagators of variable length; the one extra real modulus for
each external closed string is precisely the length of the propagator to which it is
attached.

                                         55
    In the A model, for instance, an external open string is represented by an
(End(E)-valued) one-form α, while an external closed string is represented by a
two-form h. Integration over the extra modulus of the propagator by which the
closed string is attached to the rest of the diagram multiplies h by the open string
propagator b0 /L0 . In the large t limit, this simply turns h into a one-form

                                        d∗
                                           · h.                                 (5.10)
                                        L0

This one-form then couples as just one more external open string state (which
happens to be valued in the center of End(E)). But the one-form in (5.10) is exact
(since, for instance, the open string propagator annihilates harmonic forms), so the
corresponding open string state decouples. Consequently the on-shell couplings of
open and closed strings are all zero – in either the A or B model.

    If the closed strings are, then, decoupled from the open strings, what is their
role? The following conjecture seems natural to me. The field theories we have
extracted from the A and B models all have c-number anomalies, analogous to
the central charge in two-dimensional conformal field theory. For instance, the
anomalies of Chern-Simons theory are connected with framings of three-manifolds
and of knots [30]. One-loop anomalies of the field theory related to the B model
were calculated long ago by Ray and Singer [31]. These anomalies are possible
only because of the ultraviolet difficulties of quantum field theory, which of course
are greatly ameliorated in string theory. It therefore seems reasonable to suspect
that the closed string contributions in the A and B theories cancel the anomalies
of these theories, without, in view of the decoupling argued above, having much
effect on the open string “physics.”

    In any event, whatever the closed string contributions, they are finite. In usual
string theory, possible infinities come from physical closed string poles, but in these
topological models, there are no such poles since the closed string propagator
annihilates the physical states or harmonic forms; this is because (in contrast
to conventional string backgrounds) the b0 operator annihilates the kernel of L0 .

                                          56
Thus, for instance, in the case of the B model, whose finiteness perhaps comes as
a surprise (since the field theory related to the low energy limit of the open strings
is superficially unrenormalizable), the closed strings will not ruin this finiteness.

Acknowledgements: The discussion of closed string field theory in §2 benefitted
considerably from discussions with B. Zwiebach. Several relevant references were
pointed out by L. Jeffrey.




                                          57
                             REFERENCES

 1. E. Witten. “Topological Sigma Models,” Comm. Math. Phys. 118 (1988)
   411.

 2. M. Gromov, “Pseudo-Holomorphic Curves In Symplectic Manifolds,” Invent.
   Math. 82 (1985) 307.

 3. A. Floer, “Symplectic Fixed Points And Holomorphic Spheres,” Comm.
   Math. Phys. 120 (1989) 575.

 4. S. Axelrod and I. M. Singer, “Chern-Simons Perturbation Theory,” MIT
   preprint (1991).

 5. M. Kontsevich, lecture at Institute for Advanced Study (January, 1992).

 6. E. Witten, “Mirror Manifolds and Topological Field Theory,” in Essays On
   Mirror Manifolds, ed. S.-T. Yau (International Press, 1992).

 7. W. Siegel, “Covariantly Second-Quantized Strings, II,III,” Phys. Lett. 151B
   (1985) 391,396.

 8. S. Elitzur, A. Forge, and E. Rabinovici, “On Effective Theories Of Topolog-
   ical Strings,” preprint CERN-TH.6326 (1991).

 9. G. ’t Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B72 (1974) 461.

10. E. Witten, “Two Dimensional Gravity And Intersection Theory On Moduli
   Space,” Surv. Diff. Geom. 1 (1991) 243.

11. R. Penner, “The Teichmuller Space Of A Punctured Surface,” Comm. Math.
   Phys. (1987), “Perturbative Series And The Moduli Space Of Riemann
   Surfaces,” J. Diff. Geom. 27 (1988) 35.

12. J. Harer, “The Virtual Cohomological Dimension Of The Mapping Class
   Group Of Orientable Surfaces,” Inv. Math. 84 (1986) 157.

13. B. H. Bowditch and D. B. A. Epstein, “Natural Triangulations Associated
   To A Surface,” Topology 27 (1988) 91.

                                     58
14. E. Witten, “Non-Commutative Geometry And String Field Theory,” Nucl.
    Phys. B268 (1986) 253.

15. S. Giddings, E. Martinec, and E. Witten, “Modular Invariance In String
    Field Theory,” Phys. Lett. 176B (f1986) 362.

16. J. Distler and P. Nelson, “Topological Couplings And Contact Terms In 2d
    Field Theory,” Comm. Math. Phys. 138 (1991) 273.

17. B. Zwiebach, “Closed String Field Theory: Quantum Action And The BV
    Master Equation,” preprint IASSNS-HEP-92/41 (June, 1992).

18. L. Dixon, lecture at Princeton University, ca. 1987.

19. C. Vafa, “Topological Mirrors And Quantum Rings,” in Essays on Mirror
    Manifolds, ed S.-T. Yau (International Press, 1992).

20. J. M. F. Labastida and P. M. Llatas, “Topological Matter in Two Dimen-
    sions” (preprint, 1991).

21. P. Horava, “Equivariant Topological Sigma Models,” preprint (1991).

22. V. Mathai and D. Quillen, “Superconnections, Thom Classes, and Equivari-
    ant Differential Forms,” Topology 25 (1986) 85.

23. M. F. Atiyah and L. Jeffrey, “Topological Lagrangians And Cohomology,”
    J. Geom. Phys. 7 (1990) 119.

24. D. Fried, Inv. Math. 84 (1986) 523.

25. C. B. Thorn, “Perturbation Theory For Quantized String Fields,” Nucl.
    Phys. B287 (1987) 61.

26. M. Bochicchio, “Gauge Fixing For The Field Theory Of The Bosonic String,”
    Phys. Lett. 193B (1987) 31.

27. D. Johnson and J. Millson, “Deformation Spaces Associated To Compact
    Hyperbolic Manifolds,” in Discrete Groups In Geometry And Analysis:
    Papers In Honor Of G. D. Mostow, ed R. Howe (Birkhauser, Boston, 1987).

                                      59
28. O. Piguet and S. P. Sorella, “On The Finiteness Of BRS Modulo-d Cocycles,”
    Univ. of Geneva preprint UGVA-DPT 1992/3-759.

29. D. Z. Freedman, S. B. Giddings, J. A. Shapiro, and C. B. Thorn, Nucl. Phys.
    B298 (1988) 253.

30. E. Witten, “Quantum Field Theory And The Jones Polynomial,” Comm.
    Math. Phys. 121 (1989) 351.

31. D. Ray and I. M. Singer, “Analytic Torsion And The Laplacian On Complex
    Manifolds” Ann. of Math. 98 (1973) 154.




                                     60
